This book is impossible 
A note, before we get fully under way 


1 Falling 
The day I died 
Why depression is hard to understand 
A beautiful view 
A conversation across time — part one 
Pills 
Killer 
Things people say to depressives that they don’t say in other life- 
threatening situations 
Negative placebo 
Feeling the rain without an umbrella 
Life 
Infinity 
The hope that hadn’t happened 
The cyclone 
My symptoms 
The Bank of Bad Days 
Things depression says to you 
Facts 
The head against the window 
Pretty normal childhood 
A visit 
Boys don’t cry 


2 Landing 
Cherry blossom 
Unknown unknowns 
The brain is the body — part one 
Psycho 
Jenga days 
Warning signs 





Love 
How to be there for someone with depression c 





Paris 





The ead 
Mushroom clouds 








This book is impossible 


THIRTEEN YEARS AGO I knew this couldn’t happen. 

I was going to die, you see. Or go mad. 

There was no way I would still be here. Sometimes I doubted I would even 
make the next ten minutes. And the idea that I would be well enough and 
confident enough to write about it in this way would have been just far too much 
to believe. 

One of the key symptoms of depression is to see no hope. No future. Far from 
the tunnel having light at the end of it, it seems like it is blocked at both ends, 
and you are inside it. So if I could have only known the future, that there would 
be one far brighter than anything I’d experienced, then one end of that tunnel 
would have been blown to pieces, and I could have faced the light. So the fact 
that this book exists is proof that depression lies. Depression makes you think 
things that are wrong. 


But depression itself isn’t a lie. It is the most real thing I’ve ever experienced. 
Of course, it is invisible. 

To other people, it sometimes seems like nothing at all. You are walking 
around with your head on fire and no one can see the flames. And so — as 
depression is largely unseen and mysterious — it is easy for stigma to survive. 
Stigma is particularly cruel for depressives, because stigma affects thoughts and 
depression is a disease of thoughts. 

When you are depressed you feel alone, and that no one is going through quite 
what you are going through. You are so scared of appearing in any way mad you 
internalise everything, and you are so scared that people will alienate you further 
you clam up and don’t speak about it, which is a shame, as speaking about it 
helps. Words — spoken or written — are what connect us to the world, and so 
speaking about it to people, and writing about this stuff, helps connect us to each 
other, and to our true selves. 

I know, I know, we are humans. We are a clandestine species. Unlike other 
animals we wear clothes and do our procreating behind closed doors. And we are 
ashamed when things go wrong with us. But we’ll grow out of this, and the way 
we'll do it is by speaking about it. And maybe even through reading and writing 


about it. 


I believe that. Because it was, in part, through reading and writing that I found 
a kind of salvation from the dark. Ever since I realised that depression lied about 
the future I have wanted to write a book about my experience, to tackle 
depression and anxiety head-on. So this book seeks to do two things. To lessen 
that stigma, and — the possibly more quixotic ambition — to try and actually 
convince people that the bottom of the valley never provides the clearest view. I 
wrote this because the oldest clichés remain the truest. Time heals. The tunnel 
does have light at the end of it, even if we aren’t able to see it. And there’s a 
two-for-one offer on clouds and silver linings. Words, just sometimes, can set 
you free. 


A note, before we get fully under way 


MINDS ARE UNIQUE. They go wrong in unique ways. My mind went wrong in a 
slightly different way to how other minds go wrong. Our experience overlaps 
with other people’s, but it is never exactly the same experience. Umbrella labels 
like ‘depression’ (and ‘anxiety’ and ‘panic disorder’ and ‘OCD’) are useful, but 
only if we appreciate that people do not all have the same precise experience of 
such things. 

Depression looks different to everyone. Pain is felt in different ways, to 
different degrees, and provokes different responses. That said, if books had to 
replicate our exact experience of the world to be useful, the only books worth 
reading would be written by ourselves. 

There is no right or wrong way to have depression, or to have a panic attack, 
or to feel suicidal. These things just are. Misery, like yoga, is not a competitive 
sport. But I have found over the years that by reading about other people who 
have suffered, survived and overcome despair I have felt comforted. It has given 
me hope. I hope this book can do the same. 


1 
Falling 


‘But in the end one needs more courage to live than to kill himself.’ 
—Albert Camus, A Happy Death 


The day I died 


I CAN REMEMBER the day the old me died. 

It started with a thought. Something was going wrong. That was the start. 
Before I realised what it was. And then, a second or so later, there was a strange 
sensation inside my head. Some biological activity in the rear of my skull, not 
far above my neck. The cerebellum. A pulsing or intense flickering, as though a 
butterfly was trapped inside, combined with a tingling sensation. I did not yet 
know of the strange physical effects depression and anxiety would create. I just 
thought I was about to die. And then my heart started to go. And then I started to 
go. I sank, fast, falling into a new claustrophobic and suffocating reality. And it 
would be way over a year before I would feel anything like even half-normal 
again. 

Up until that point I’d had no real understanding or awareness of depression, 
except that I knew my mum had suffered from it for a little while after I was 
bom, and that my great-grandmother on my father’s side had ended up 
committing suicide. So I suppose there had been a family history, but it hadn’t 
been a history I’d thought about much. 

Anyway, I was twenty-four years old. I was living in Spain — in one of the 
more sedate and beautiful corners of the island of Ibiza. It was September. 
Within a fortnight, I would have to return to London, and reality. After six years 
of student life and summer jobs. I had put off being an adult for as long as I 
could, and it had loomed like a cloud. A cloud that was now breaking and 
raining down on me. 

The weirdest thing about a mind is that you can have the most intense things 
going on in there but no one else can see them. The world shrugs. Your pupils 
might dilate. You may sound incoherent. Your skin might shine with sweat. And 
there was no way anyone seeing me in that villa could have known what I was 
feeling, no way they could have appreciated the strange hell I was living 
through, or why death seemed such a phenomenally good idea. 


I stayed in bed for three days. But I didn’t sleep. My girlfriend Andrea came in 
with water at regular intervals, or fruit, which I could hardly eat. 


The window was open to let fresh air in, but the room was still and hot. I can 
remember being stunned that I was still alive. I know that sounds melodramatic, 
but depression and panic only give you melodramatic thoughts to play with. 
Anyway, there was no relief. I wanted to be dead. No. That’s not quite right. I 
didn’t want to be dead, I just didn’t want to be alive. Death was something that 
scared me. And death only happens to people who have been living. There were 
infinitely more people who had never been alive. I wanted to be one of those 
people. That old classic wish. To never have been born. To have been one of the 
three hundred million sperm that hadn’t made it. 

(What a gift it was to be normal! We’re all walking on these unseen tightropes 
when really we could slip at any second and come face to face with all the 
existential horrors that only lie dormant in our minds.) 

There was nothing much in this room. There was a bed with a white 
patternless duvet, and there were white walls. There might have been a picture 
on the wall but I don’t think so. I certainly can’t remember one. There was a 
book by the bed. I picked it up once and put it back down. I couldn’t focus for as 
much as a second. There was no way I could express fully this experience in 
words, because it was beyond words. Literally, I couldn’t speak about it 
properly. Words seemed trivial next to this pain. 

I remembered worrying about my younger sister, Phoebe. She was in 
Australia. I worried that she, my closest genetic match, would feel like this. I 
wanted to speak to her but knew I couldn’t. When we were little, at home in 
Nottinghamshire, we had developed a bed-time communication system of 
knocking on the wall between our rooms. I now knocked on the mattress, 
imagining she could hear me all the way through the world. 

Knock. Knock. Knock. 


I didn’t have terms like ‘depression’ or ‘panic disorder’ in my head. In my 
laughable naivety I did not really think that what I was experiencing was 
something that other people had ever felt. Because it was so alien to me I 
thought it had to be alien to the species. 

‘Andrea, I’m scared.’ 

‘It’s okay. It’s going to be okay. It’s going to be okay.’ 

“‘What’s happening to me?’ 

‘T don’t know. But it’s going to be okay.’ 


‘T don’t understand how this can be happening.’ 
On the third day, I left the room and I left the villa, and I went outside to kill 


myself. 


Why depression is hard to understand :ris 


INVISIBLE. 
It is not ‘feeling a bit sad’. 


It is the wrong word. The word depression makes me think of a flat tyre, 
something punctured and unmoving. Maybe depression minus anxiety feels like 
that, but depression laced with terror is not something flat or still. (The poet 
Melissa Broder once tweeted: ‘what idiot called it “depression” and not “there 
are bats living in my chest and they take up a lot of room, ps. I see a shadow”?’) 
At its worst you find yourself wishing, desperately, for any other affliction, any 
physical pain, because the mind is infinite, and its torments — when they happen 
— can be equally infinite. 


You can be a depressive and be happy, just as you can be a sober alcoholic. 


It doesn’t always have an obvious cause. 


It can affect people — millionaires, people with good hair, happily married 
people, people who have just landed a promotion, people who can tap dance and 
do card tricks and strum a guitar, people who have no noticeable pores, people 
who exude happiness in their status updates — who seem, from the outside, to 
have no reason to be miserable. 


It is mysterious even to those who suffer from it. 


A beautiful view 


THE SUN WAS beating hard. The air smelt of pine and the sea. The sea was right 
there, just below the cliff. And the cliff edge was only a few steps away. No 
more than twenty, I would say. The only plan I had was to take twenty-one steps 
in that direction. 

‘T want to die.’ 

There was a lizard near my feet. A real lizard. I felt a kind of judgement. The 
thing with lizards is that they don’t kill themselves. Lizards are survivors. You 
take off their tail and another grows back. They aren’t mopers. They don’t get 
depressed. They just get on with it, however harsh and inhospitable the 
landscape. I wanted, more than anything, to be that lizard. 

The villa was behind me. The nicest place I had ever lived. In front of me, the 
most glorious view I had ever seen. A sparkling Mediterranean, looking like a 
turquoise tablecloth scattered with tiny diamonds, fringed by a dramatic 
coastline of limestone cliffs and small, near-white forbidden beaches. It fit 
almost everyone’s definition of beautiful. And yet, the most beautiful view in the 
world could not stop me from wanting to kill myself. 

A little over a year before I had read a lot of Michel Foucault for my MA. 
Much of Madness and Civilization. The idea that madness should be allowed to 
be madness. That a fearful, repressive society brands anyone different as ill. But 
this was illness. This wasn’t having a crazy thought. This wasn’t being a bit 
wacky. This wasn’t reading Borges or listening to Captain Beefheart or smoking 
a pipe or hallucinating a giant Mars bar. This was pain. I had been okay and 
now, suddenly, I wasn’t. I wasn’t well. So I was ill. It didn’t matter if it was 
society or science’s fault. I simply did not — could not — feel like this a second 
longer. I had to end myself. 

I was going to do it as well. While my girlfriend was in the villa, oblivious, 
thinking that I had just needed some air. 

I walked, counting my steps, then losing count, my mind all over the place. 

‘Don’t chicken out,’ I told myself. Or I think I told myself. ‘Don’t chicken 
out.’ 

I made it to the edge of the cliff. I could stop feeling this way simply by taking 
another step. It was so preposterously easy — a single step — versus the pain of 
being alive. 


Now, listen. If you have ever believed a depressive wants to be happy, you are 
wrong. They could not care less about the luxury of happiness. They just want to 
feel an absence of pain. To escape a mind on fire, where thoughts blaze and 
smoke like old possessions lost to arson. To be normal. Or, as normal is 
impossible, to be empty. And the only way I could be empty was to stop living. 
One minus one is zero. 

But actually, it wasn’t easy. The weird thing about depression is that, even 
though you might have more suicidal thoughts, the fear of death remains the 
same. The only difference is that the pain of life has rapidly increased. So when 
you hear about someone killing themselves it’s important to know that death 
wasn’t any less scary for them. It wasn’t a ‘choice’ in the moral sense. To be 
moralistic about it is to misunderstand. 

I stood there for a while. Summoning the courage to die, and then summoning 
the courage to live. To be. Not to be. Right there, death was so close. An ounce 
more terror, and the scales would have tipped. There may be a universe in which 
I took that step, but it isn’t this one. 


I had a mother and a father and a sister and a girlfriend. That was four people 
right there who loved me. I wished like mad, in that moment, that I had no one at 
all. Not a single soul. Love was trapping me here. And they didn’t know what it 
was like, what my head was like. Maybe if they were in my head for ten minutes 
they’d be like, ‘Oh, okay, yes, actually. You should jump. There is no way you 
should feel this amount of pain. Run and jump and close your eyes and just do it. 
I mean, if you were on fire I could put a blanket around you, but the flames are 
invisible. There is nothing we can do. So jump. Or give me a gun and I’I1 shoot 
you. Euthanasia.’ 

But that was not how it worked. If you are depressed your pain is invisible. 

Also, if I’m honest, I was scared. What if I didn’t die? What if I was just 
paralysed, and I was trapped, motionless, in that state, for ever? 

I think life always provides reasons to not die, if we listen hard enough. Those 
reasons can stem from the past — the people who raised us, maybe, or friends or 
lovers — or from the future — the possibilities we would be switching off. 

And so I kept living. I turned back towards the villa and ended up throwing up 
from the stress of it all. 


A conversation across time — part One ten we: 1 


want to die. 
NOW ME: Well, you aren’t going to. 
THEN ME: That is terrible. 
NOW ME: No. It is wonderful. Trust me. 
THEN ME: I just can’t cope with the pain. 
NOW ME: I know. But you are going to have to. And it will be worth it. 
THEN ME: Why? Is everything perfect in the future? 
NOW ME: No. Of course not. Life is never perfect. And I still get depressed from 
time to time. But I’m at a better place. The pain is never as bad. I’ve found out 
who I am. I’m happy. Right now, I am happy. The storm ends. Believe me. 
THEN ME: I can’t believe you. 
NOW ME: Why? 














THEN ME: You are from the future, and I have no future. 
NOW ME: I just told you... 


Pills 


I HAD GONE days without proper food. I hadn’t noticed the hunger because of all 
the other crazy stuff that was happening to my body and brain. Andrea told me I 
needed to eat. She went to the fridge and got out a carton of Don Simon 
gazpacho (in Spain they sell it like fruit juice). 

‘Drink this,’ she said, unscrewing the cap and handing it over. 

I took a sip. The moment I tasted it was the moment I realised how hungry I 
was so I swallowed some more. I’d probably had half the carton before I had to 
go outside and throw up again. Admittedly, throwing up from drinking Don 
Simon gazpacho might not be the surest sign of illness in the world, but Andrea 
wasn’t taking her chances. 

‘Oh God,’ she said. ‘We’re going now.’ 

‘Where?’ I said. 

‘To the medical centre.’ 

‘They’ ll make me take pills,’ I said. ‘I can’t take pills.’ 


‘Matt. You need pills. You are beyond the point at which not taking pills is an 
option. We’re going, okay?’ 

I added a question mark in there, but I don’t really remember it as a question. I 
don’t know what I answered, but I do know that we went to the medical centre. 
And that I got pills. 

The doctor studied my hands. They were shaking. ‘So how long did the panic 
last?’ 

‘Tt hasn’t really stopped. My heart is beating too fast still. I feel weird.’ Weird 
nowhere near covered it. I don’t think I added to it, though. Just speaking was an 
intense effort. 

‘It is adrenaline. That is all. How is your breathing. Have you 
hyperventilated?’ 

‘No. It is just my heart. I mean, my breathing feels .. . weird . . . but 
everything feels weird.’ 

He felt my heart. He felt it with his hand. Two fingers pressed into my chest. 
He stopped smiling. 

‘Are you on drugs?’ 


‘No!’ 
‘Have you taken any?’ 
‘In my life, yes. But not this week. I’d been drinking a lot, though.’ 


‘Vale, vale, vale,’ he said. ‘You need diazepam. Maximum. The most I am 
able to give for you.’ For a doctor in a country where you could get diazepam 
freely over the counter, like it was paracetamol or ibuprofen, this was quite a 
significant thing to say. “This will fix you. I promise.’ 


I lay there, and imagined the tablets were working. For a moment panic 
simmered down to a level of heavy anxiety. But that feeling of momentary 
relaxation actually triggered more panic. And this was a flood. I felt everything 
pull away from me, like when Brody is sitting on the beach in Jaws and thinks 
he sees the shark. I was lying there on a sofa but I felt a literal pulling away. As 
if something was sliding me towards a further distance from reality. 


Killer 


SUICIDE IS NOW — in places including the UK and US — a leading cause of death, 
accounting for over one in a hundred fatalities. According to figures from the 
World Health Organization, it kills more people than stomach cancer, cirrhosis 
of the liver, colon cancer, breast cancer, and Alzheimer’s. As people who kill 
themselves are, more often than not, depressives, depression is one of the 
deadliest diseases on the planet. It kills more people than most other forms of 
violence — warfare, terrorism, domestic abuse, assault, gun crime — put together. 

Even more staggeringly, depression is a disease so bad that people are killing 
themselves because of it in a way they do not kill themselves with any other 
illness. Yet people still don’t think depression really is that bad. If they did, they 
wouldn’t say the things they say. 


Things people say to depressives that they 
don’t say in other life-threatening situations 


‘COME ON, I know you’ve got tuberculosis, but it could be worse. At least no 
one’s died.’ 


‘Why do you think you got cancer of the stomach?’ 


“Yes, I know, colon cancer is hard, but you want to try living with someone who 
has got it. Sheesh. Nightmare.’ 


‘Oh, Alzheimer’s you say? Oh, tell me about it, I get that all the time.’ 
‘Ah, meningitis. Come on, mind over matter.’ 


“Yes, yes, your leg is on fire, but talking about it all the time isn’t going to help 
things, is it?’ 


‘Okay. Yes. Yes. Maybe your parachute has failed. But chin up.’ 


Negative placebo 


MEDICATION DIDN’T WORK for me. I think I was partly to blame. 

In Bad Science Ben Goldacre points out that ‘You are a placebo responder. 
Your body plays tricks on your mind. You cannot be trusted.’ This is true, and it 
can surely work both ways. During that very worst time, when depression co- 
existed with full-on 24/7 panic disorder, I was scared of everything. I was, quite 
literally, scared of my shadow. If I looked at an object — shoes, a cushion, a 
cloud — for long enough then I would see some malevolence inside it, some 
negative force that, in an earlier and more superstitious century, I might have 
interpreted as the Devil. But the thing I was most scared of was drugs or 
anything (alcohol, lack of sleep, sudden news, even a massage) that would 
change my state of mind. 

Later, during lesser bouts of anxiety, I would often find myself enjoying 
alcohol too much. That soft warm cushioning of existence that is so comforting 
you end up forgetting the hangover that will ensue. After important meetings I 
would find myself in bars alone, drinking through the afternoon and nearly 
missing the last train home. But in 1999 I was years away from being back to 
this relatively normal level of dysfunction. 

It is a strange irony that it was during the period when I most needed my mind 
to feel better, that I didn’t want to actively interfere with my mind. Not because I 
didn’t want to be well again, but because I didn’t really believe feeling well 
again was possible, or far less possible than feeling worse. And worse was 
terrifying. 

So I think part of the problem was that a reverse placebo effect was going on. 
I would take the diazepam and instantly panic, and the panic increased the 
moment I felt the drug have any effect at all. Even if it was a good effect. 

Months later a similar thing would happen when I started taking St John’s 
Wort. It would even happen to a degree with ibuprofen. So clearly the diazepam 
wasn’t entirely to blame. And diazepam is far from being the strongest 
medication out there. Yet the feeling and level of disconnection I felt on 
diazepam is something others claim to feel on it too, and so I think that the drug 
itself (for me) was at least part of the problem. 


Feeling the rain without an umbrella 


MEDICATION IS AN incredibly attractive concept. Not just for the person with 
depression, or the person running a pharmaceutical firm, but for society as a 
whole. It underlines the idea we have hammered into us by the hundred thousand 
TV ads we have seen that everything can be fixed by consuming things. It 
fosters a just-shut-up-and-take-the-pill approach, and creates an ‘us’ and ‘them’ 
divide, where everyone can relax and feel ‘unreason’ — to borrow Michel 
Foucault’s favourite word — is being safely neutered in a society which demands 
we be normal even as it drives us insane. 

But anti-depressants and anti-anxiety medication still fill me with fear. It 
doesn’t help that the names — Fluoxetine, Venlafaxine, Propranolol, Zopiclone — 
sound like sci-fi villains. 

The only drugs I ever took that seemed to make me feel a bit better were 
sleeping pills. I only had one packet of them because we’d bought them in Spain, 
where the pharmacists wear reassuring white coats and talk like doctors. 
Dormidina was the brand name, I think. They didn’t help me sleep but they 
helped me be awake without feeling total terror. Or distanced me from that 
terror. But I also knew that they would be very easy to become addicted to, and 
that the fear of not taking them could rapidly overtake the fear of taking them. 


The sleeping tablets enabled me to function enough to go home. I can remember 
our last day in Spain. I was now sitting at the table, saying nothing as Andrea 
explained to the people we were working for and technically living with (it was 
their villa, but they were rarely there) — Andy and Dawn -— that we were going 
home. 

Andy and Dawn were good people. I liked them. They were a few years older 
than me and Andrea, but they were always easy to be around. They ran the 
largest party in Ibiza, Manumission, which had begun as a small night in 
Manchester’s gay village a few years before and morphed into a kind of Studio 
54 in the Med. By 1999, it was the epicentre of club culture, a magnet for the 
likes of Kate Moss, Jade Jagger, Irvine Welsh, Jean Paul Gaultier, the Happy 
Mondays, Fatboy Slim and thousands of European clubbers. It had once seemed 
like heaven, but now the idea of all that music and all those party people seemed 
like a nightmare. 

But Andy and Dawn didn’t want Andrea to leave. 


‘Why don’t you stay here? Matt would be okay. He looks fine.’ 

‘He’s not fine,’ Andrea answered them. ‘He’s ill.’ 

I was — by Ibiza standards at least — not a drug person. I was an alcohol 
person. A Bukowski-worshipping eternal student who had spent my time on the 
island sitting down in the sun selling tickets at an outside box office while 
reading airport novels (during my day job selling tickets, I had befriended a 
magician named Carl who gave me John Grisham novels in exchange for 
Margaret Atwood and Nietzsche) and drinking booze. But still, I wished madly 
I’d never taken anything in my life stronger than a coffee. I certainly wished I 
hadn’t drunk so many bottles of Vifia Sol and glasses of vodka and lemon during 
the last month, or had eaten a few proper breakfasts, or got a bit more sleep. 

‘He doesn’t look ill.’ Dawn still had glitter on her face from wherever she had 
been the night before. The glitter troubled me. 


‘I’m sorry,’ I said, weakly, wishing for a more visible illness. 

Guilt smashed me like a hammer. 

I took another sleeping pill and then my afternoon dose of diazepam and we 
went to the airport. The party was over. 


While on diazepam or the sleeping pills, I never felt any closer to being ‘fixed’. I 
stayed exactly as ill as ever. The most pills could do, I supposed, was place a 
distance there. The sleeping pills forced my brain to slow down a bit, but I knew 
nothing had really changed. Just as, years later, when I was back to drinking 
alcohol again, I would often cope with lower-level anxiety by getting drunk, all 
the time knowing that it would be there waiting for me with a hangover on top. 

I am reluctant to come out and be anti all pills because I know for some 
people some pills work. In some cases they seem to numb the pain enough for 
the good, real work of getting better to happen. In others, they provide a partial 
long-term solution. Many people can’t do without them. In my case, after my 
disorientating diazepam panic attacks I had been so scared to take pills that I 
never actually took anything directly for my depression (as opposed to panic and 
anxiety). 

Personally, for me, I am happy that I largely mended myself without the aid of 
medication, and feel that having to experience the pain minus any ‘anaesthetic’ 
meant I got to know my pain very well, and become alert to the subtle upward or 
downward shifts in my mind. Though I do wonder whether, if I’d had the 
courage to battle those pill-fearing panic attacks, it could have lessened the pain. 
It was such relentless, continuous pain that just to think about it now affects my 


breathing, and my heart can go. I think of being in the passenger seat of a car, as 
leaden terror swamped me. I had to rise in my seat, my head touching the roof of 
the car, my body trying to climb out of itself, skin crawling, mind whirring faster 
than the dark landscape. It would have been good not to have known that kind of 
terror, and if a pill could have helped, then I should have taken it. If ’'d had 
something to lessen that mental agony (and really that is the word) then maybe it 
would have been easier to recover from. But by not taking it, I became very in 
tune with myself. This helped me know what exactly made me feel better 
(exercise, sunshine, sleep, intense conversation, etc.) and this alertness, an 
alertness I know from myself and others can be lost via pills, eventually helped 
me build myself back up from scratch. If I had been dulled or felt that otherness 
meds can make you feel, things might have been harder. 


Here is Professor Jonathan Rottenberg, an evolutionary psychologist and author 
of The Depths, writing in 2014 words that are strangely comforting: 


How will we better contain depression? Expect no magic pill. One lesson learned from treating 
chronic pain is that it is tough to override responses that are hardwired into the body and mind. 
Instead, we must follow the economy of mood where it leads, attending to the sources that bring so 
many into low mood states — think routines that feature too much work and too little sleep. We need 
broader mood literacy and an awareness of tools that interrupt low mood states before they morph 
into longer and more severe ones. These tools include altering how we think, the events around us, 
our relationships, and conditions in our bodies (by exercise, medication, or diet). 


Life SEVEN MONTHS BEFORE I first swallowed a diazepam tablet I had been in 


the office of a recruitment agency in central London. 

‘So what do you want to do with your life?’ the recruitment agent asked. She 
had a long solemn face, like a sculpture on Easter Island. 

‘T don’t know.’ 

‘Do you see yourself as a sales person?’ 

‘Maybe,’ I lied. I was mildly hungover. (We were living next to a pub. Three 
pints of lager and a Black Russian or two was my nightly routine.) I had very 
little idea of what I wanted to do with my life but I was pretty sure it didn’t 
involve being a sales person. 

‘To be honest, your CV presents something of a foggy image. But it’s April. 
Not graduate season. So we should be able to find you something.’ 

And she was right. After a series of disastrous interviews, I got a job selling 
advertising space for journalist trade paper the Press Gazette in Croydon. I was 
placed under the supervision of an Australian called Iain, who explained to me 
the fundamentals of selling. 

“Have you heard of Aida?’ he asked me. 

“The opera?’ 

‘What? No. AIDA. Attention. Interest. Desire. Action. The four stages of a 
sales call. You get their attention, then their interest, then their desire to do 
something, before they want to commit to an action.’ 

‘Right.’ 

Then he told me, from nowhere. ‘I’ve got an enormous penis.’ 

‘What?’ 

‘See? I’ve got your attention.’ 

‘So, I should talk about my penis.’ 

‘No. It was an example.’ 

‘Got it,’ I said, staring out of the window at a bleak grey Croydon sky. 

I didn’t really get on with Iain. True, he asked me to ‘join the boys’ at lunch, 
and have a pint and a game of pool. It was all dirty jokes and football and 
slagging off their girlfriends. I hated it. I hadn’t felt this out of place since I was 
thirteen. The plan — mine and Andrea’s — had been to sort our lives out so we 
didn’t have to go back to Ibiza that summer. But one lunch break I felt this 
intense bleakness inside me as if a cloud had passed over my soul. I literally 
couldn’t stomach another hour phoning people who didn’t want to be phoned. So 


I left the job. Just walked out. I was a failure. A quitter. I had nothing at all on 
the horizon. I was sliding down, becoming vulnerable to an illness that was 
waiting in the wings. But I didn’t realise it. Or didn’t care. I was just thinking of 
escape. 


Infinity 


A HUMAN Bopy is bigger than it looks. Advances in science and technology have 
shown that, really, a physical body is a universe in itself. Each of us is made up 
of roughly a hundred trillion cells. In each of those cells is roughly that same 
number again of atoms. That is a lot of separate components. Our brains alone 
have a hundred billion brain cells, give or take a few billion. 

Yet most of the time we do not feel the near-infinite nature of our physical 
selves. We simplify by thinking about ourselves in terms of our larger pieces. 
Arms, legs, feet, hands, torso, head. Flesh, bones. 

A similar thing happens with our minds. In order to cope with living they 
simplify themselves. They concentrate on one thing at a time. But depression is a 
kind of quantum physics of thought and emotion. It reveals what is normally 
hidden. It unravels you, and everything you have known. It turns out that we are 
not only made of the universe, of ‘star-stuff’? to borrow Carl Sagan’s phrase, but 
we are as vast and complicated as it too. The evolutionary psychologists might 
be right. We humans might have evolved too far. The price for being intelligent 
enough to be the first species to be fully aware of the cosmos might just be a 
capacity to feel a whole universe’s worth of darkness. 


The hope that hadn’t happened 


MY MUM AND dad were at the airport. They stood there looking tired and happy 
and worried all at once. We hugged. We drove back. 

I was better. I was better. I had left my demons behind in the Mediterranean 
and now I was fine. I was still on sleeping pills and diazepam but I didn’t need 
them. I just needed home. I just needed Mum and Dad. Yes. I was better. I was 
still a little bit edgy, but I was better. I was better. 

“We were so worried,’ Mum said, and eighty-seven other variations of that 
theme. 

Mum turned around in the passenger seat and looked at me and smiled and the 
smile had a slightly crumpled quality, her eyes glazed with tears. I felt it. The 
weight of Mum. The weight of being a son that had gone wrong. The weight of 
being loved. The weight of being a disappointment. The weight of being a hope 
that hadn’t happened the way it should have. 


But. 

I was better. A little bit frayed. But that was understandable. I was better, 
essentially. I could still be the hope. I might end up living until I am ninety- 
seven. I could be a lawyer or a brain surgeon or a mountaineer or a theatre 
director yet. It was early days. Early days. Early days. 

It was night outside the window. Newark 24. Newark was where I had grown 
up and where I was going back to. A market town of 40,000 people. It was a 
place I had only ever wanted to escape, but now I was going back. But that was 
fine. I thought of my childhood. I thought of happy and unhappy days at school, 
and the continual battle for self-esteem. 24. I was twenty-four. The road sign 
seemed to be a statement from fate. Newark 24. We knew this would happen. All 
that was missing was my name. 

I remember we had a meal around the kitchen table and I didn’t say much, but 
just enough to prove I was okay and not crazy or depressed. I was okay. I was 
not crazy or depressed. 

I think it was a fish pie. I think they had made it especially. Comfort food. It 
made me feel good. I was sitting around the table eating fish pie. It was half past 
ten. I went to the downstairs toilet, and pulled the light on with a string. The 


downstairs bathroom was a kind of dark pink. I pissed, I flushed, and I began to 
notice my mind was changing. There was a kind of clouding, a shifting of 
psychological light. 

I was better. I was better. But it only takes a doubt. A drop of ink falls into a 
clear glass of water and clouds the whole thing. So the moment after I realised I 
wasn’t perfectly well was the moment I realised I was still very ill indeed. 


The cyclo T@ pousts are LIKE swallows. They follow each other and 


swarm together. I stared at myself in the mirror. I stared at my face until it was 
not my face. I went back to the table and sat down and I did not say how I was 
feeling to anyone. To say how I was feeling would lead to feeling more of what I 
was feeling. To act normal would be to feel a bit more normal. I acted normal. 
‘Oh, look at the time,’ Mum said, with dramatic urgency. ‘I have to get up for 
school tomorrow.’ (She was a head teacher at an infant school.) ‘You go to bed,’ 
I said. 
“Yes, you go up, Mary,’ Andrea said. ‘We can sort out the beds and stuff.’ 
‘There’s a bed and there’s a mattress on the floor in his room, but you are 
welcome to have our bed if you like for tonight,’ said Dad. 
‘It’s okay,’ I said. ‘We’|l be fine.’ 


Dad squeezed my shoulder before he went to bed. ‘It’s good to have you 
here.’ 

“Yes. It’s good to be here.’ 

I didn’t want to cry. Because a) I didn’t want him to see me cry, and b) if I 
cried I would feel worse. So, I didn’t cry. I went to bed. 

And the next day I woke up, and it was there. The depression and anxiety, 
both together. People describe depression as a weight, and it can be. It can be a 
real physical weight, as well as a metaphorical, emotional one. But I don’t think 
weight is the best way to describe what I felt. As I lay there, on the mattress on 
the floor — I had insisted Andrea sleep on the bed, not out of straightforward 
chivalry but because that is what I would have done if I was normal — I felt like I 
was trapped in a cyclone. Outwardly, to others, I would over the next few 
months look a bit slower than normal, a bit more lethargic, but the experience 
going on in my mind was always relentlessly and oppressively fast. 


My symptoms THESE WERE SOME of the other things I also felt: Like 


my reflection showed another person. 

A kind of near-aching tingling sensation in my arms, hands, chest, throat and 
at the back of my head. 

An inability to even contemplate the future. (The future was not going to 
happen, for me anyway.) Scared of going mad, of being sectioned, of being put 
in a padded cell in a straitjacket. 

Hypochondria. 

Separation anxiety. 

Agoraphobia. 

A continual sense of heavy dread. 

Mental exhaustion. 

Physical exhaustion. 

Like I was useless. 

Chest tightness and occasional pain. 

Like I was falling even while I was standing still. 


Aching limbs. 

The occasional inability to speak. 

Lost. 

Clammy. 

An infinite sadness. 

An increased sexual imagination. (Fear of death often seems to 
counterbalance itself with thoughts of sex.) A sense of being disconnected, of 
being a cut-out from another reality. 

An urge to be someone else/anyone else. 

Loss of appetite (I lost two stone in six months). 

An inner trembling (I called it a soul-quiver). 

As though I was on the verge of a panic attack. 

Like I was breathing too-thin air. 

Insomnia. 

The need to continuously scan for warning signs that I was a) going to die or 
b) go mad. 

Finding such warning signs. And believing them. 


The desire to walk, and quickly. 

Strange feelings of déja vu, and things that felt like memories but hadn’t 
happened. At least not to me. 

Seeing darkness around the periphery of my vision. 

The wish to switch off the nightmarish images I would sometimes see when I 
closed my eyes. 

The desire to step out of myself for a while. A week, a day, an hour. Hell, just 
for a second. 


At the time these experiences felt so weird I thought I was the only person in the 
history of the world to have ever had them (this was a pre-Wikipedia age), 
though of course there are millions going through an equivalent experience at 
any one time. I’d often involuntarily visualise my mind as a kind of vast and 
dark machine, like something out of a steampunk graphic novel, full of pipes and 
pedals and levers and hydraulics, emitting sparks and steam and noise. 

Adding anxiety to depression is a bit like adding cocaine to alcohol. It presses 
fast-forward on the whole experience. If you have depression on its own your 
mind sinks into a swamp and loses momentum, but with anxiety in the cocktail, 
the swamp is still a swamp but the swamp now has whirlpools in it. The 
monsters that are there, in the muddy water, continually move like modified 
alligators at their highest speed. You are continually on guard. You are on guard 
to the point of collapse every single moment, while desperately trying to keep 
afloat, to breathe the air that the people on the bank all around you are breathing 
as easily as anything. 

You don’t have a second. You don’t have a single waking second outside of 
the fear. That is not an exaggeration. You crave a moment, a single second of not 
being terrified, but the moment never comes. The illness that you have isn’t the 
illness of a single body part, something you can think outside of. If you have a 
bad back you can say ‘my back is killing me’, and there will be a kind of 
separation between the pain and the self. The pain is something other. It attacks 
and annoys and even eats away at the self but it is still not the self. 

But with depression and anxiety the pain isn’t something you think about 
because it is thought. You are not your back but you are your thoughts. 

If your back hurts it might hurt more by sitting down. If your mind hurts it 
hurts by thinking. And you feel there is no real, easy equivalent of standing back 
up. Though often this feeling itself is a lie. 


The Bank of Bad Days 


WHEN YOU ARE very depressed or anxious — unable to leave the house, or the sofa, 
or to think of anything but the depression — it can be unbearably hard. Bad days 
come in degrees. They are not all equally bad. And the really bad ones, though 
horrible to live through, are useful for later. You store them up. A bank of bad 
days. The day you had to run out of the supermarket. The day you were so 
depressed your tongue wouldn’t move. The day you made your parents cry. The 
day you nearly threw yourself off a cliff. So if you are having another bad day 
you can say, Well, this feels bad, but there have been worse. And even when you 
can think of no worse day — when the one you are living is the very worst there 
has ever been — you at least know the bank exists and that you have made a 
deposit. 


Things depression SdYS to YOU ney, sap-sack! 


Yes, you! 

What are you doing? Why are you trying to get out of bed? 

Why are you trying to apply for a job? Who do you think you are? Mark 
Zuckerberg? 

Stay in bed. 

You are going to go mad. Like Van Gogh. You might cut off your ear. 

Why are you crying? 

Because you need to put the washing on? 

Hey. Remember your dog, Murdoch? He’s dead. Like your grandparents. 

Everyone you have ever met will be dead this time next century. 

Yep. Everyone you know is just a collection of slowly deteriorating cells. 


Look at the people walking outside. Look at them. There. Outside the 
window. Why can’t you be like them? 

There’s a cushion. Let’s just stay here and look at it and contemplate the 
infinite sadness of cushions. 

PS. I’ve just seen tomorrow. It’s even worse. 


Facts 


WHEN YOU ARE trapped inside something that feels so unreal, you look for 
anything that can give you a sense of your bearings. I craved knowledge. I 
craved facts. I searched for them like lifebuoys in the sea. But statistics are tricky 
things. 

Things that occur in the mind can often be hidden. Indeed, when I first 
became ill I spent a lot of energy on looking normal. People often only know 
someone is suffering if they tell them, and with depression that doesn’t always 
happen, especially if you are male (more on that later). Also, over time, facts 
have changed. Indeed, whole concepts and words change. Depression didn’t 
used to be depression. It used to be melancholia, and far fewer people suffered 
from that than they do from current depression. But did they really? Or are 
people more open about such things? 

But anyway, here are some of the facts we have right now. 


SUICIDE FACTS 


Suicide is the leading cause of death among men under the age of thirty-five. 
Suicide rates vary widely depending on where you are in the world. For 
instance, if you live in Greenland you are twenty-seven times more likely to kill 
yourself than if you live in Greece. 
A million people a year kill themselves. Between ten and twenty million 
people a year try to. Worldwide, men are over three times more likely to kill 
themselves than women. 


DEPRESSION FACTS 


One in five people get depression at some point in their lives. (Though obviously 
more than that will suffer from mental illness.) Anti-depressants are on the rise 
almost everywhere. Iceland has the highest consumption, followed by Australia, 
Canada, Denmark, Sweden, Portugal and the UK. 

Twice as many women as men will suffer a serious bout of depression in their 
lives. 


Combined anxiety and depression is most common in the UK, followed by 
anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, ‘pure’ depression, phobias, eating 
disorders, OCD, and panic disorder. 

Women are more likely to seek and receive treatment for mental health 
problems than men. 

The risk of developing depression is about 40 per cent if a biological parent 
has been diagnosed with the illness. 


Sources: World Health Organization, the Guardian, Mind, Black Dog Institute. 


The head against the window 


I WAS IN my parents’ bedroom. On my own. Andrea was downstairs, I think. 
Anyway, she wasn’t with me. I was standing by the window with my head 
against the glass. It was one of those times when the depression was there on its 
own, uncoloured by anxiety. It was October. The saddest of months. My parents’ 
street was a popular route into town, so there were a few people walking along 
the pavement. Some of these people I knew or recognised from my childhood, 
which had only officially ended six years before. Though maybe it hadn’t ended 
at all. 

When you are at the lowest ebb, you imagine — wrongly — that no one else in 
the world has felt so bad. I prayed to be those people. Any of them. The eighty- 
year-olds, the eight-year-olds, the women, the men, even their dogs. I craved to 
exist in their minds. I could not cope with the relentless self-torment any more 
than I could cope with my hand on a hot stove when I could see buckets of ice 
all around me. Just the sheer exhaustion of never being able to find mental 
comfort. Of every positive thought reaching a cul-de-sac before it starts. 

I cried. 

I had never been one of those males who were scared of tears. I’d been a Cure 
fan, for God’s sake. I’d been emo before it was a term. Yet weirdly, depression 
didn’t make me cry that often, considering how bad it was. I think it was the 
surreal nature of what I was feeling. The distance. Tears were a kind of language 
and I felt all language was far away from me. I was beneath tears. Tears were 
what you shed in purgatory. By the time you were in hell it was too late. The 
tears burnt to nothing before they began. 

But now, they came. And not normal tears either. Not the kind that start 
behind the eyes. No. These came from the deep. They seemed to come from my 
gut, my stomach was trembling so much. The dam had burst. And once they 
came they couldn’t stop, even when my dad walked into the bedroom. He looked 
at me and he couldn’t understand, even though it was all too familiar. My mum 
had suffered from post-natal depression. He came over to me, and saw my face, 
and the tears were contagious. His eyes went pink and watery. I couldn’t 
remember the last time I’d seen him cry. He said nothing at first but hugged me, 
and I felt loved, and I tried to gather as much of that love as I could. I needed all 
of it. 


‘T’m sorry,’ I think I said. 

‘Come on,” he said, softly. “You can do this. Come on. You can pull yourself 
together, Mattie. You’re going to have to.’ 

My dad wasn’t a tough dad. He was a gentle, caring, intelligent dad, but he 
still didn’t have the magical ability to see inside my head. 

He was right, of course, and I wouldn’t have wanted him to say much else, but 
he had no idea as to how hard that sounded. 

To pull myself together. 

No one did. From the outside a person sees your physical form, sees that you 
are a unified mass of atoms and cells. Yet inside you feel like a Big Bang has 
happened. You feel lost, disintegrated, spread across the universe amid infinite 
dark space. 

‘T’ll try, Dad, I'll try.’ 

They were the words he wanted to hear so I gave him them. And I returned to 
staring out at those ghosts of my childhood. 


Pretty normal childhood 


DOES MENTAL ILLNESS just happen, or is it there all along? According to the 
World Health Organization nearly half of all mental disorders are present in 
some form before the age of fourteen. 

When I became ill at twenty-four it felt like something terribly new and 
sudden. I had a pretty normal, ordinary childhood. But I never really felt very 
normal. (Does anyone?) I usually felt anxious. 

A typical memory would be me as a ten-year-old, standing on the stairs and 
asking the babysitter if I could stay with her until my parents came back. I was 
crying. 

She was kind. She let me sit with her. I liked her a lot. She smelt of vanilla 
and wore baggy t-shirts. She was called Jenny. Jenny the Babysitter Who Lived 
Up the Street. A decade or so later she would have transformed into Jenny 
Saville, the Britart star famed for her large-scale painted depictions of naked 
women. 


‘Do you think they’! be home soon?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Jenny, patiently. ‘Of course they will. They’re only a mile away. 
That’s not very far, you know?’ 

I knew. 

But I also knew they could have got mugged or killed or eaten by dogs. They 
weren’t, of course. Very few Newark-on-Trent residents ended their Saturday 
night being eaten by dogs. They came home. But all my childhood, over and 
over again, I carried on this way. Always inadvertently teaching myself how to 
be anxious. In a world where possibility is endless, the possibilities for pain and 
loss and permanent separation are also endless. So fear breeds imagination, and 
vice versa, on and on and on, until there is nothing left to do except go mad. 


Then something else. A bit less ordinary, but still in the ballpark. I was thirteen. 
Me and a friend went over to some girls in our year on the school field. Sat 
down. One of the girls — one I fancied more than anything — looked at me and 
then made a disgusted face to her friends. Then she spoke words that I would 
remember twenty-six years later when I came to write them down in a book. She 


said: ‘Ugh. I don’t want that sitting next to me. With his spider legs on his face.’ 
She went on to explain, as the ground kept refusing to swallow me up, what she 
meant. ‘The hair growing out of his moles. It looks like spiders.’ 

At about five that afternoon I went into the bathroom at home and used my 
dad’s razor to shave the hairs off my moles. I looked at my face and hated it. I 
looked at the two most prominent moles on my face. 

I picked up my toothbrush and pressed it into my left cheek, right over my 
largest mole. I clenched my eyes shut and rubbed hard. I brushed and brushed, 
until there was blood dripping into the sink, until my face was throbbing with 
heat and pain from the friction. 

My mum came in that day and saw me bleeding. 

‘Matthew, what on earth has happened to your face?’ 

I held a tissue over the fresh, bleeding scar and mumbled the truth. 


That night I couldn’t sleep. My left cheek throbbed beneath a giant plaster, but 
that wasn’t the reason. I was thinking of school, of explaining away the plaster. I 
was thinking of that other universe where I was dead. And where the girl would 
hear I was dead and the guilt would make her cry. A suicidal thought, I suppose. 
But a comforting one. 


My childhood went by. I remained anxious. I felt like an outsider, with my left- 
wing, middle-class parents in a right-wing, working-class town. At sixteen, I got 
arrested for shoplifting (hair gel, Crunchie bar) and spent an afternoon in a 
police cell, but that was a symptom of teen idiocy and wanting to fit in, not 
depression. 

I skateboarded badly, got eclectic grades, cultivated asymmetric hair, carried 
my virginity around like a medieval curse. Normal stuff. 

I didn’t totally fit in. I kind of disintegrated around people, and became what 
they wanted me to be. But paradoxically, I felt an intensity inside me all the 
time. I didn’t know what it was, but it kept building, like water behind a dam. 
Later, when I was properly depressed and anxious, I saw the illness as an 
accumulation of all that thwarted intensity. A kind of breaking through. As 
though, if you find it hard enough to let your self be free, your self breaks in, 
flooding your mind in an attempt to drown all those failed half-versions of you. 


A visit 


PAUL, MY OLD shoplifting partner in crime, was in my parents’ living room. I 
hadn’t seen him in a few years, since school. To me, it might as well have been 
millennia. He was looking at me like I was my former self. How could he not see 
the difference? 

‘Do you want to go out on Saturday night? Come on, mate. Old times’ sake.’ 

The idea was ridiculous. I couldn’t leave the house without feeling an infinite 
terror. ‘I can’t.’ 

‘What’s the matter?’ 

‘T’m just not feeling well. My head’s a bit whacked.’ 

‘That’s why you need a good night out. If you’re feeling down. Get Andrea to 
come too. Come on, mate.’ 

‘Paul, you don’t understand . . .’ 

I was trapped in a prison. Years before, after spending a few hours in a police 
cell for that Crunchie bar, I had developed a fear of being locked in places. I 
never realised how you could be locked inside your own mind. 

Act like a man, I told myself. Though I had never really been good at that. 


Boys don’t cry 


I WANT TO talk about being a man. 

A staggeringly higher number of men than women kill themselves. In the UK 
the ratio is 3:1, in Greece 6:1, in the USA 4:1. This is pretty average. According 
to the World Health Organization, the only countries in the world where more 
women than men kill themselves are China and Hong Kong. Everywhere else, 
many more men than women end their own lives. This is especially strange 
when you think that, according to every official study, about twice as many 
women experience depression. 

So, clearly, in most places there is something about being a man that makes 
you more likely to kill yourself. And there is also a paradox. If suicide is a 
symptom of depression (it is), then why do more women suffer depression than 
men? Why, in other words, is depression more fatal if you are a man rather than 
a woman? 

The fact that suicide rates vary between eras and countries and genders shows 
that suicide is not set in stone for anyone. 

Consider the UK. In 1981, 2,466 women in the UK took their own lives. 
Thirty years later that number had almost halved to 1,391. The corresponding 
figures for men are 4,129 and then 4,590. 

So back in 1981, when the Office of National Statistics records began, men 
were still more likely to kill themselves than women, but only 1.9 times more 
likely. Now they are 3.5 times more likely. 

Why do so many men still kill themselves? What is going wrong? 

The common answer is that men, traditionally, see mental illness as a sign of 
weakness and are reluctant to seek help. 

Boys don’t cry. But they do. We do. I do. I weep all the time. (I wept this 
afternoon, watching Boyhood.) And boys — and men — do commit suicide. In 
White Noise, Don DeLillo’s anxiety-ridden narrator Jack Gladney is tormented 
by the concept of masculinity and how he measures up: ‘What could be more 
useless than a man who couldn’t fix a dripping faucet — fundamentally useless, 
dead to history, to the messages in his genes?’ And what if, instead of a broken 
faucet it is a broken mind? Then maybe a man who was worried about his 
manliness would feel he should be able to fix that on his own too, with nothing 
but silence amid the ‘white noise’ of modern life, and maybe a few litres of 


alcohol. 

If you are a man or a woman with mental health problems, you are part of a 
very large and growing group. Many of the greatest and, well, toughest people of 
all time have suffered from depression. Politicians, astronauts, poets, painters, 
philosophers, scientists, mathematicians (a hell of a lot of mathematicians), 
actors, boxers, peace activists, war leaders, and a billion other people fighting 
their own battles. 

You are no less or more of a man or a woman or a human for having 
depression than you would be for having cancer or cardiovascular disease or a 
car accident. 

So what should we do? Talk. Listen. Encourage talking. Encourage listening. 
Keep adding to the conversation. Stay on the lookout for those wanting to join in 
the conversation. Keep reiterating, again and again, that depression is not 
something you ‘admit to’, it is not something you have to blush about, it is a 
human experience. A boy-girl-man-woman-young-old-black-white-gay-straight- 
rich-poor experience. It is not you. It is simply something that happens to you. 
And something that can often be eased by talking. Words. Comfort. Support. It 
took me more than a decade to be able to talk openly, properly, to everyone, 
about my experience. I soon discovered the act of talking is in itself a therapy. 
Where talk exists, so does hope. 


2 
Landing 


“... once the storm is over you won’t remember how you made it through, how 
you managed to survive. You won’t even be sure, in fact, whether the storm is 
really over. But one thing is certain. When you come out of the storm you won’t 
be the same person who walked in. That’s what this storm’s all about.’ 

—Haruki Murakami, Kafka on the Shore 


Cherry blossom 


A SIDE-EFFECT OF depression is sometimes to become obsessed with the 
functioning of your brain. 

During my breakdown, living back with my parents, I used to imagine 
reaching into my own skull and taking out the parts of it that were making me 
feel bad. From having spoken to other people with depression, and having even 
come across it in other books, this seems to be a common fantasy. But which 
parts would I have taken out? Would I take out a whole solid chunk, or 
something small and fluid? 

Once, during a dip, I sat on a bench in Park Square in Leeds. It was the sedate 
part of the city centre. Victorian townhouses now turned into legal offices. I 
stared at a cherry tree and felt flat. Depression, without anxiety. Just a total, 
desperate flatness. I could hardly move. Of course, Andrea was with me. I didn’t 
tell her how bad I was feeling. I just sat there, looking at the pink blossom and 
the branches. Wishing my thoughts could float away from my head as easily as 
the blossom floated from the tree. I started to cry. In public. Wishing I was a 
cherry tree. 

The more you research the science of depression, the more you realise it is 
still more characterised by what we don’t know than what we do. It is 90 per 
cent mystery. 


Unknown unknowns 


AS DR DAVID Adam says in his brilliant account of obsessive compulsive disorder, 
The Man Who Couldn’t Stop: ‘Only a fool or a liar will tell you how the brain 
works.’ 

A brain is not a toaster. It is complex. It may only weigh a little over a kilo, 
but it is a kilo that contains a whole lifetime of memories. 

It is worryingly magical, in that it does so much with us still not 
understanding how or why. It is — like all else — made out of atoms which 
themselves came into being in stars millions of years ago. Yet more is known 
about those faraway stars than the processes of our brain, the one item in the 
whole universe that can think about, well, the whole universe. 

A lot of people still believe that depression is about chemical imbalance. 

‘Incipient insanity was mainly a matter of chemicals,’ wrote Kurt Vonnegut, 
in Breakfast of Champions. ‘Dwayne Hoover’s body was manufacturing certain 
chemicals which unbalanced his mind.’ 

It is an attractive idea. And one that has, over the years, been supported by 
numerous scientific studies. 

A lot of the research into the scientific causes of depression has focused on 
chemicals such as dopamine and, more often, serotonin. Serotonin is a 
neurotransmitter. That is a type of chemical that sends signals from one area of 
the brain to the other. 

The theory goes that an imbalance in serotonin levels — caused by low brain 
cell production of serotonin — equates to depression. So it is no surprise that 
some of the most common anti-depressants, from Prozac down, are SSRIs — 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors — which raise the serotonin levels in your 
brain. 

However, the serotonin theory of depression looks a bit wobbly. 

The problem has been highlighted by the emergence of anti-depressants that 
have no effect on serotonin, and some that do the exact opposite of an SSRI 
(namely, selective serotonin reuptake enhancers, such as tianapetine) which 
have been shown to be as effective at treating depression. Add to this the fact 
that serotonin in an active living human brain is a hard thing to measure and you 
have a very inconclusive picture indeed. 

Back in 2008, Ben Goldacre in the Guardian was already questioning the 


serotonin model. ‘Quacks from the $600 billion pharma industry sell the idea 
that depression is caused by low serotonin levels in the brain, and so you need 
drugs which raise the serotonin levels in your brain . . . That’s the serotonin 
hypothesis. It was always shaky, and the evidence is now hugely contradictory.’ 

So, annoyingly, scientists aren’t all singing from the same hymn sheet. Some 
don’t even believe there is a hymn sheet. Others have burnt the hymn sheet and 
written their own songs. 

For instance, a professor of behavioural science at Stanford University called 
Robert Malenka believes that research needs to be carried out in other areas. 
Like on the bit of the brain right in the centre, the tiny ‘nucleus accumbens’. As 
this is already known to be responsible for pleasure and addiction, it makes a 
kind of sense that if it isn’t working properly we’ll feel the opposite of pleasure 
— anhedonia. That is the complete inability to feel pleasure, a chief symptom of 
depression. 

It also would mean that the fantasy about reaching into our skulls and taking 
out the part of our brains that is causing us bother is highly improbable, as we 
would have to go through the entire frontal cortex to reach this tiny central piece 
of us. 

Maybe looking at a specific part or chemical in the brain is only ever going to 
give a partial answer. Maybe we should be looking at how we live, and how our 
minds weren’t made for the lives we lead. Human brains — in terms of cognition 
and emotion and consciousness — are essentially the same as they were at the 
time of Shakespeare or Jesus or Cleopatra or the Stone Age. They are not 
evolving with the pace of change. Neolithic humans never had to face emails or 
breaking news or pop-up ads or Iggy Azalea videos or a self-service checkout at 
a strip-lit Tesco Metro on a busy Saturday night. Maybe instead of worrying 
about upgrading technology and slowly allowing ourselves to be cyborgs we 
should have a little peek at how we could upgrade our ability to cope with all 
this change. 

One thing can be said for sure: we are nowhere near the end of science — 
especially a baby science like neuroscience. So most of what we know now will 
be disproved or reassessed in the future. That is how science works, not through 
blind faith, but continual doubt. 


All we can do, for the moment, is really all we need to do — listen to ourselves. 
When we are trying to get better, the only truth that matters is what works for us. 
If something works we don’t necessarily care why. Diazepam didn’t work for 


me. Sleeping pills and St John’s Wort and homeopathy didn’t fix me either. I 
have never tried Prozac, because even the idea intensified my panic, so I don’t 
know about that. But then I have never tried cognitive behavioural therapy 
either. If pills work for you it doesn’t really matter if this is to do with serotonin 
or another process or anything else — keep taking them. Hell, if licking wallpaper 
does it for you, do that. I am not anti pill. I am pro anything that works and I 
know pills do work for a lot of people. There may well come a time in the future 
where I take pills again. For now, I do what I know keeps me just about level. 
Exercise definitely helps me, as does yoga and absorbing myself in something or 
someone I love, so I keep doing these things. I suppose, in the absence of 
universal certainties, we are our own best laboratory. 


The brain is the body — part one 


WE TEND TO see the brain and the body as separate things. While in previous 
epochs the heart was at the centre of our being, or at least on an equal footing 
with the mind, now we have this strange separation where the mind is operating 
the rest of us, like a man inside a JCB digger. 

The whole idea of ‘mental health’ as something separate to physical health 
can be misleading, in some ways. So much of what you feel with anxiety and 
depression happens elsewhere. The heart palpitations, the aching limbs, the 
sweaty palms, the tingling sensations that often accompany anxiety, for instance. 
Or the aching limbs and the total-body fatigue that sometimes becomes part of 
depression. 


Psycho 


I SUPPOSE THE first time I really felt my brain was a little bit alien, a bit other, was 
when I was thirteen. It was a few months after the time I had tried to remove my 
mole with a toothbrush. 

I was in the Peak District, in Derbyshire. School trip. The girls were staying in 
the hostel. The boys were meant to be staying there too but there had been a 
double-booking, so eight of us boys stayed in the stables outside, a good distance 
from the warm hotel. 

I hated being away from home. This was another of my big anxieties. I wanted 
to be back in my own bed looking at my poster of Béatrice Dalle, or reading 
Stephen King’s Christine. 

I lay on a top bunk looking out of the window at the black boggy landscape 
under a starless sky. I didn’t really have any friends among these boys. They 
talked only about football, which wasn’t my specialist subject, and wanking, 
which was slightly more a specialist subject but not one I felt comfortable 
discussing in public. So I pretended to be asleep. 

There was no teacher with us, here in the stables, and there was a kind of Lord 
of the Flies feeling I didn’t like very much. I was tired. We had walked about ten 
miles that day, a lot of it through peat bogs. Sleep weighed on me, as thick and 
dark as the land all around. 

I woke, to laughing. 

Mad, crazed laughing, as if the funniest thing in the world had just happened. 

I had talked in my sleep. Nothing is more hilarious to a thirteen-year-old boy 
than witnessing an unguarded and embarrassing moment of another thirteen- 
year-old boy. 

I had said something incoherent about cows. And Newark. Newark was my 
hometown, so that was understandable. The cows thing, well, that was weird. 
There were no cows in the Peak District. I was told I had said, over and over, 
‘Kelham is in Newark.’ (Kelham was a village just outside Newark, where the 
town council was. My dad worked as an architect there, in the town planning 
department.) I tried my best to ride the joke. But I was tired, nervous. A school 
trip was just school, condensed. I had not enjoyed school since I was eleven, 
when I had been at a village school with a total pupil population of twenty-eight. 
The school I was at now, Magdalene High School, was a place where I was not 


very happy. I had spent a lot of the first year faking stomach aches that were 
rarely believed. 

Then I fell asleep again. And when I woke up I was shaking. I was standing 
up, and I could feel cold air, and there was a considerable amount of blood 
dripping from my hand. My hand was red and shining with it. There was a shard 
of glass sticking out of my palm. The window to the stables was smashed in 
front of me. I felt frightened. 

The other boys were all awake, but not laughing now. A teacher was there too. 
Or was about to be there. My hand had to be bandaged. 

I had got out of bed in my sleep. I had shouted out — rather comically — about 
cows again. (‘The cows are coming! The cows are coming!’) Then I had gone 
for a piss next to someone’s bed. And then smashed the window. Shortly after, 
one of the boys shook my arm and I woke up. 

It wasn’t the first time I had sleepwalked. Over the previous year I had gone 
into my sister’s bedroom and taken books off her shelves, thinking I was in a 
library. But my sleepwalking had never gone public. Until now. 


I gained a new nickname. Psycho. I felt like a freak. But it could have been 
worse. I had loving parents and a few friends and a sister I could chat to for 
hours. My life was pretty comfortable and ordinary, but sometimes a sense of 
loneliness would creep over me. I felt lonely. Not depression. Just a version of 
that wallowy, teenage, no-one-understands-me feeling. Of course, I didn’t 
understand me either. 

I worried about things. Nuclear war. Ethiopia. The prospect of going on a 
ferry. I worried all the time. The only thing that didn’t worry me was the thing 
that probably should have: worry itself. It would be eleven years before I had to 
address that one. 


Jenga days 


ELEVEN YEARS AFTER smashing a window in my sleep, during those ‘breakdown 
months’ as I’d later call them, there was a lot of empty time to stare worry in the 
face. 

My parents would get up and leave for work and then me and Andrea would 
have long days in the house. It’s weird to write about this period. I mean, really 
there is nothing to write about. It was, from the outside, the least eventful phase 
of my life by quite a way. 

From the outside, it was me talking with Andrea, either in my childhood 
bedroom or downstairs in the kitchen. Occasionally we would venture outside 
for a short walk in the afternoon. We would go either to the nearest corner shop, 
only about two or three hundred metres away, or — on more adventurous days — 
we would go and walk by the river Trent, which was a little further away, on the 
other side of the town centre, and involved me walking through streets I knew so 
well from childhood. (How could they stay the same when I felt so different?) 
Sometimes we bought a newspaper and a tin of soup and some bread, and we 
would return and read a bit of the paper and make the soup. Later, we might help 
prepare the evening meal. And that was about it. Talking and sitting and 
walking. It was hardly Lawrence of Arabia. Life at the lowest possible volume 
two twenty-four-year-olds could manage. 

And yet, those days were the most intense I have lived. Those days contained 
thousands of tiny battles. They are filled with memories so painful I can only 
now, with the distance of fourteen and a half years, look at them head-on. I was 
a nervous wreck. People say ‘take it one day at a time’. But, I used to think to 
myself, that is all right for them to say. Days were mountains. A week was a trek 
across the Himalayas. You see, people say that time is relative, but it really 
bloody is. 

Einstein said the way to understand relativity was to imagine the difference 
between love and pain. ‘When you are courting a nice girl an hour seems like a 
second. When you sit on a red-hot cinder a second seems like an hour.’ Every 
moment was red-hot. And the only real thing I wished for, beyond feeling better, 
was for time to move quicker. I would want 9 a.m. to be 10 a.m. I would want 
the morning to be the afternoon. I would want the 22nd of September to be the 
23rd of September. I would want the light to be dark and the dark to be light. I 


still had the toy globe I’d had as a boy in my room. I sometimes used to stand 
there and spin it, wishing I was spinning the world deep into the next 
millennium. 

I was as obsessed with time as some people are about money. It was the only 
weapon I had. I would build up hours and minutes like pounds and pence. In my 
head, amid all the raging waters of anxiety, this knowledge buoyed like hope. It 
is October 3rd, twenty-two days since it happened. 

The longer that time went on, and I was still a) alive and b) not mistaking 
anyone for a hat, the more I felt like there was a chance I could get through this. 
But it didn’t always work like that. I stacked the days up like Jenga blocks, 
imagining I was making progress, and then — crash — along would come a five- 
hour panic attack or a day of total apocalyptic darkness, and those Jenga days 
would topple back down again. 


Warning signs 


WARNING SIGNS ARE very hard with depression. 

It’s especially hard for people with no direct experience of depression to know 
them when they see them. Partly this is because some people are confused about 
what depression actually is. We use ‘depressed’ as a synonym for ‘sad’, which is 
fine, as we use ‘starving’ as a synonym for ‘hungry’, though the difference 
between depression and sadness is the difference between genuine starvation and 
feeling a bit peckish. 

Depression is an illness. Yet it doesn’t come with a rash or a cough. It is hard 
to see, as it is generally invisible. Even though it is a serious illness it is also 
surprisingly hard for many sufferers to recognise it at first. Not because it 
doesn’t feel bad — it does — but because that bad feeling seems unrecognisable, 
or can be confused with other things. For instance, if you feel worthless you 
might think ‘I feel worthless because I am worthless’. It might be hard to see it 
as a symptom of an illness. Or even if it is seen as that, it’s possible that low 
self-worth, combined with fatigue, might mean there is little will or ability to 
vocalise it. 

But in any case, these are some of the most frequently cited signs that 
someone is depressed. 


Fatigue — if someone is tired all the time, for no real reason. 

Low self-esteem — a hard one for others to spot, especially in those people 
who aren’t that comfortable talking about their feelings. And low self-esteem 
isn’t exactly conducive with getting out there in the world. 

‘Psychomotor retardation’ — in certain cases of depression, slow movements 
and slow speech may happen. 

Loss of appetite (though massive increase in appetite can sometimes be a 
symptom too). 

Irritability (though, to be fair, that can be a sign of anything). 

Frequent crying episodes. 

Anhedonia — I first knew of this word as Woody Allen’s original title for the 
film Annie Hall. It means, as I’ve said, the inability to experience pleasure in 
anything. Even the pleasurable things, like sunsets and nice food, and watching 
dubious Chevy Chase comedies from the eighties. That sort of stuff. 

Sudden introversion — if someone seems quieter, or more introverted than 


normal, it could mean they are depressed. (I can remember there were times 
when I couldn’t speak. It felt like I couldn’t move my tongue, and talking 
seemed so utterly pointless. Just as the things other people talked about seemed 
to belong to another world.) 


Demons 


THE DEMON SAT next to me in the back of the car. 

He was real and false all at once. Not a hallucination exactly, and not 
transparent like a theme park ghost, but there and not there. There when I closed 
my eyes. There even when I opened them again, a kind of flickering mind-print 
transferred over reality, but something imagined rather than seen. 

He was short. About three foot. Impish and grey, like a gargoyle on a 
cathedral, and he was looking up at me, smiling. And then he got up on the seat 
and started licking my face. He had a long, dry tongue. And he kept on. Lick, 
lick, lick. He didn’t really scare me. I mean, fear was there, obviously. I was 
living continually inside fear. But the demon didn’t send me deeper into terror. If 
anything, he was a comfort. The licks were caring licks, as if I was one big 
wound and he was trying to make me better. 

The car was heading to the Nottingham Theatre Royal. We were off to see 
Swan Lake. It was the production where all the swans were male. My mother 
was talking. Andrea was in the front passenger seat, listening with polite 
patience to my mother. I can’t remember what she was saying but I can 
remember she was talking, because I kept on thinking This is weird. Mum is 
talking about Matthew Bourne and her friends who have seen this production 
and there is a happy demon on the back seat licking my face. 

The licking got a bit more annoying. I tried to switch the demon off, or the 
idea of the demon, but of course that made it worse. Lick, lick, lick, lick. I 
couldn’t really feel the tongue on my skin, but the idea of the demon licking my 
face was real enough for my brain to tingle, as if I was being tickled. 

The demon laughed. We went into the theatre. Swans danced. I felt my heart 
speed up. The dark, the confinement, my mother holding my hand, it was all too 
much. This was it. Everything was over. Except, of course, it wasn’t. I stayed in 
my seat. 

Anxiety and depression, that most common mental health cocktail, fuse 
together in weird ways. I would often close my eyes and see strange things, but 
now I feel like sometimes those things were only there because one of the things 
I was scared of was going mad. And if you are mad, then seeing things that 
aren’t there is probably a symptom. 

If you are scared when there is nothing to be scared of, eventually your brain 


has to give you things. And so that classic expression — ‘the only thing to fear is 
fear itself’ — becomes a kind of meaningless taunt. Because fear is enough. It is a 
monster, in fact. 

And, of course — 

‘Monsters are real,’ Stephen King said. ‘And ghosts are real too. They live 
inside us, and sometimes, they win.’ 


It was dark. The house was silent so we tried to be too. 

‘T love you,’ she whispered. 

‘T love you,’ I whispered back. 

We kissed. I felt demons watching us, gathering around us, as we kissed and 
held each other. And slowly, in my mind, the demons retreated for a while. 


Existence 


LIFE IS HARD. It may be beautiful and wonderful but it is also hard. The way 
people seem to cope is by not thinking about it too much. But some people are 
not going to be able to do that. And besides, it is the human condition. We think 
therefore we are. We know we are going to grow old, get ill and die. We know 
that is going to happen to everyone we know, everyone we love. But also, we 
have to remember, the only reason we have love in the first place is because of 
this. Humans might well be the only species to feel depression as we do, but that 
is simply because we are a remarkable species, one that has created remarkable 
things — civilisation, language, stories, love songs. Chiaroscuro means a contrast 
of light and shade. In Renaissance paintings of Jesus, for instance, dark shadow 
was used to accentuate the light bathing Christ. It is a hard thing to accept, that 
death and decay and everything bad leads to everything good, but I for one 
believe it. As Emily Dickinson, eternally great poet and occasionally anxious 
agoraphobe, said: ‘That it will never come again is what makes life so sweet.’ 


Rising 


ROY NEARY: Just close your eyes and hold your breath and everything will turn 
real pretty. 
—Steven Spielberg, Close Encounters of the Third Kind 


Things you think during your first panic 
attack 


1.1 am going to die. 

2.1 am going to go so mad there will be no coming back. 

3. This won’t end. 

4. Everything is going to get worse. 

5. No one’s heart is meant to beat this fast. 

6. I am thinking far too fast. 

7. 1am trapped. 

8. No one has felt this way before. Ever. In the whole of human history. 
9. Why are my arms numb? 


10. I will never get over this. 


Things you think during your 1,000th panic 
attack 


1. Here it comes. 

2. I’ve been here before. 

3. But wow, it’s still quite bad. 
4. I might die. 

5. ’m not going to die. 

6. I am trapped. 

7. This is the worst ever. 

8. No, it’s not. Remember Spain. 
9. Why are my arms numb? 


10. I will get over this. 


The art of walking on your own 


WHEN I WAS most severely depressed I had quite a vast collection of related 
mental illnesses. We humans love to compartmentalise things. We love to divide 
our education system into separate subjects, just as we love to divide our shared 
planet into nations, and our books into separate genres. But the reality is that 
things are blurred. Just as being good at mathematics often means someone is 
good at physics, so having depression means it probably comes with other 
things. Anxieties, maybe some phobias, a pinch of OCD. (Compulsive 
swallowing was a big thing with me.) 

I also had agoraphobia and separation anxiety for a while. 

A measure of progress I had was how far I could walk on my own. 

If I was outside, and I wasn’t with Andrea or one of my parents, I wasn’t able 
to cope. But rather than avoid these situations, I forced myself into them. 


I think this helped. It is quite gruelling, always facing fear and heading into it, 
but it seemed to work. 

On the days when I was feeling very brave, I would say something — ahem — 
impossibly heroic like ‘I am going to go to the shop to get some milk. And 
Marmite.’ 

And Andrea would look at me, and say ‘On your own?’ 

“Yes. On my own. I’Il be fine.’ 

It was 1999. Lots of people didn’t have mobile phones. So on your own still 
meant on your own. And so I would hurriedly put on my coat and grab some 
money and leave the house as quickly as I could, trying to outpace the panic. 

And by the time I reached the end of Wellington Road, my parents’ street, it 
would be there, the darkness, whispering at me, and I would turn the corner onto 
Sleaford Road. Orange-bricked terraces with net curtains. And I would feel a 
deep level of insecurity, like I was in a shuttle that was leaving the Earth’s orbit. 
It wasn’t simply a walk to the shop. It was Apollo 13. 

‘It’s okay,’ I whispered to myself. 

And I would pass a fellow human walking a dog and they would ignore me, or 
they would frown or — worse — smile, and so I would smile back, and then my 
head would quickly punish me. 


That’s the odd thing about depression and anxiety. It acts like an intense fear 
of happiness, even as you yourself consciously want that happiness more than 
anything. So if it catches you smiling, even fake smiling, then — well, that stuff’s 
just not allowed and you know it, so here comes ten tons of counterbalance. 

The weirdness. That feeling of being outside alone, it was as unnatural as 
being a roof without walls. I would see the shop up ahead. The letters ‘Londis’ 
still looking small and far away. So much sadness and fear to walk through. 


There is no way I can do this. 

There is no way I can walk to the shop. On my own. And find milk. And 
Marmite. 

If you go back home you will be weaker still. What are you going to do? Go 
back and be lost and go mad? If you go back the chances of living for ever in a 
padded cell with white walls is higher than it is already. Do it. Just walk to the 
shop. It’s a shop. You’ve been walking to the corner shop on your own since you 
were ten. One foot in front of the other, shoulders back. Breathe. 


Then my heart kicked in. 

Ignore it. 

But listen — bbomboomboomboomboom. 
Ignore it. 


But listen, but listen, but fucking listen. 


And the other things. 

The mind images, straight out of unmade horror films. The pins-and-needles 
sensation at the back of my head, then all through my brain. The numb hands 
and arms. The sense of being physically empty, of dissolving, of being a ghost 
whose existence was sourced by electric anxiety. And it became hard to breathe. 
The air thinned. It took massive concentration just to keep control of my 
breathing. 


Just go to the shop, just carry on, just get there. 


I got to the shop. 
Shops, by the way, were the places I would panic in most, with or without 
Andrea. Shops caused me intense anxiety. I was never really sure what it was. 


Was it the lighting? 

Was it the geometric layout of the aisles? 

Was it the CCTV cameras? 

Was it that the point of brands was to scream for attention, and when you were 
deeply in tune with your surroundings maybe those screams got to you? A kind 
of death by Unilever. This was only Londis, hardly a hypermarket. And the door 
was open, the street was right there, and that street joined on to my parents’ 
street, which contained my parents’ house, which contained Andrea, who 
contained everything. If I was running, I could probably get back there in little 
over a minute. 

I tried to focus. Coco Pops. It was hard. Frosties. Really hard. Crunchy Nut 
Cornflakes. Sugar Puffs. The honey monster had never looked like an actual 
monster before. What was I in here for, other than to prove a point to myself? 


This is crazy. This is the craziest thing I have ever done. 

It’s just a shop. 

It’s just a shop you have been in, on your own, five hundred times before. Get 
a grip. Get a grip. But on what? There is nothing to grip onto. Everything is 
slippy. Life is so infinitely hard. It involves a thousand tasks all at once. And I 
am a thousand different people, all fleeing away from the centre. 


The thing I hadn’t realised, before I became mentally ill, is the physical aspect 
of it. I mean, even the stuff that happens inside your head is all sensation. My 
brain tingled, whirred, fluttered and pumped. Much of this action seemed to 
happen near the rear of my skull, in my occipital lobe, though there was also 
some fuzzy, TV-static, white-noise feelings going on in my frontal lobe. If you 
thought too much, maybe you could feel those thoughts happening. 

‘An infinity of passion can be contained in one minute,’ wrote Flaubert, ‘like 
a crowd in a small space.’ 


Get the fuck out of this shop. It’s too much. You can’t take this any more. Your 
brain is going to explode. 

Brains don’t explode. Life isn’t a David Cronenberg movie. 

But maybe I could fall the same distance again. Maybe the fall that happened 
in Ibiza had only landed me halfway. Maybe the actual Underworld was much 
further down in the basement and I was heading there, and I’d end up like a 
shell-shocked soldier from a poem, dribbling and howling and lost, unable even 
to kill myself. And maybe being in this shop was going to send me there. 


There was a woman behind the counter. I can still picture her. She was about 
my age. Maybe she had gone to my school, but I didn’t recognise her. She had 
that kind of dyed red hair that was a bit half-hearted. She was large and pale 
skinned and was reading a celebrity magazine. She looked calmer than calm. I 
wanted to jump ship. I wanted to be her. I wanted to be her so much. Does that 
sound silly? Of course it does. This whole thing sounds silly. 


Indiana Jones and the Temple of Marmite. 


I found the Marmite. I grabbed it as an old rap from Eric B. & Rakim played 
at high speed in my head. ‘I’m also a sculpture, born with structure .. .’ I was a 
sculpture with no structure. A structureless sculpture who still had to get the 
milk. Rows of milk bottles in a fridge can be as terrifying and unnatural as 
anything, with the right (wrong) perspective. My parents got semi-skimmed, but 
the only semi-skimmed here was in pints, not the two-pint ones that they 
normally got, so I picked up two of the one-pinters, hooking my index finger 
through the handles and taking them, and the Marmite, to the counter. 


Boomboomboomboomboom. 


The woman I wanted to be was not particularly fast at her job. I think she was 
the slowest person there had ever been at her job. I think she may well have been 
the incentive for the later move towards self-service checkouts in many shops. 
Even as I wanted to be her, I hated her slowness. 


Hurry up, I didn’t say. Do you have any idea of what you are doing? 


I wanted to go back and start my life again at her pace, and then I would not 
be feeling like this. I needed a slower run-up. 

‘Do you need a bag?’ 

I sort of did need a bag, but I couldn’t risk slowing her down any more. 
Standing still was very hard. When every bit of you is panicking, then walking is 
better than standing. 

Something flooded my brain. I closed my eyes. I saw dwarf demons having 
fun, laughing at me as if my madness was an act at a carnival. 

‘No. It’s okay. I only live around the corner.’ 

Around the bend. 

I paid with a five-pound note. ‘Keep the change.’ 

And she started to realise I was a bit weird and I left the shop and I was out, 
back into the vast and open world, and I kept walking as fast as I could walk (to 
break into a run would be a kind of defeat), feeling like a fish on the deck of a 


boat, needing the water again. 

‘It’s okay, it’s okay, it’s okay...’ 

I turned the corner and I prayed more than anything not to see someone I 
knew on Wellington Road. No one. Just emptiness and suburban, semi-detached, 
late Victorian houses, lined up and staring at each other. 

And I got back to number 33, my parents’ house, and I rang the bell and 
Andrea answered and I was inside and there was no relief, because my mind was 
quick to point out that being relieved about surviving a trip to the corner shop 
was another confirmation of sickness, not wellness. But maybe, mind, there 
would come a day when you could be as slow as the girl in the shop at pointing 
out such things. 

“You’re getting there,’ said Andrea. 

‘Yeah,’ I said, and tried so hard to believe it. 

‘We’re going to get you better.’ 

It’s not easy, being there for a depressive. 


A conversation across time — part two 


THEN ME: I can’t do this. 

NOW ME: You think you can’t, but you can. You do. You will. 

THEN ME: This pain, though. You must have forgotten what it was like. I went on 
an escalator today, in a shop, and I felt myself disintegrating. It was like the 
whole universe was pulling me apart. Right there, in John Lewis. 

NOW ME: I probably have forgotten, a little bit. But listen, look, I’m here. I’m 
here now. And I made it. We made it. You just have to hold on. 

THEN ME: I so want to believe that you exist. That I don’t kill you off. 

NOW ME: You didn’t. You don’t. You won’t. 

THEN ME: Why would I stay alive? Wouldn’t it be better to feel nothing than to 
feel such pain? Isn’t zero worth more than minus one thousand? 

NOW ME: Listen, just listen, just get this through your head, okay — you make it, 
and on the other side of this there is life. L-I-F-E. You understand? And there 
will be stuff you enjoy. And just stop worrying about worrying. Just worry — you 
can’t help that — but don’t meta-worry. 

THEN ME: You look old. You have crow’s feet. Are you starting to lose your hair? 
NOW ME: Yes. But remember, we’ve always worried about this stuff. Can you 
remember that holiday to the Dordogne when we were ten? We leaned forward 
into the mirror and started to worry about the lines in our forehead. We were 
worrying about the visible effects of ageing back then. Because we have always 
been scared of dying. 

THEN ME: Are you still scared of dying? 

NOW ME: Yes. 

THEN ME: I need a reason to stay alive. I need something strong that will keep me 
here. 

NOW ME: Okay, okay, give mea minute... 


Reasons to stay alive 


. You are on another planet. No one understands what you are going 
through. But actually, they do. You don’t think they do because the only 
reference point is yourself. You have never felt this way before, and the 
shock of the descent is traumatising you, but others have been here. You 
are in a dark, dark land with a population of millions. 


. Things aren’t going to get worse. You want to kill yourself. That is as low 
as it gets. There is only upwards from here. 


. You hate yourself. That is because you are sensitive. Pretty much every 
human could find a reason to hate themselves if they thought about it as 
much as you did. We’re all total bastards, us humans, but also totally 
wonderful. 


. SO what, you have a label? ‘Depressive’. Everyone would have a label if 
they asked the right professional. 


. That feeling you have, that everything is going to get worse, is just a 
symptom. 


. Minds have their own weather systems. You are in a hurricane. Hurricanes 
run out of energy eventually. Hold on. 


. Ignore stigma. Every illness had stigma once. We fear getting ill, and fear 
tends to lead to prejudice before information. Polio used to be erroneously 
blamed on poor people, for instance. And depression is often seen as a 
‘weakness’ or personality failing. 


. Nothing lasts for ever. This pain won’t last. The pain tells you it will last. 
Pain lies. Ignore it. Pain is a debt paid off with time. 


o: 


10. 


Minds move. Personalities shift. To quote myself, from The Humans: 
“Your mind is a galaxy. More dark than light. But the light makes it 
worthwhile. Which is to say, don’t kill yourself. Even when the darkness is 
total. Always know that life is not still. Time is space. You are moving 
through that galaxy. Wait for the stars.’ 


You will one day experience joy that matches this pain. You will cry 
euphoric tears at the Beach Boys, you will stare down at a baby’s face as 
she lies asleep in your lap, you will make great friends, you will eat 
delicious foods you haven’t tried yet, you will be able to look at a view 
from a high place and not assess the likelihood of dying from falling. There 
are books you haven’t read yet that will enrich you, films you will watch 
while eating extra-large buckets of popcorn, and you will dance and laugh 
and have sex and go for runs by the river and have late-night conversations 
and laugh until it hurts. Life is waiting for you. You might be stuck here 
for a while, but the world isn’t going anywhere. Hang on in there if you 
can. Life is always worth it. 


Love 


WE ARE ESSENTIALLY alone. There is no getting around this fact, even if we try 
and forget it a lot of the time. When we are ill, there is no escape from this truth. 
Pain, of any kind, is a very isolating experience. My back is playing up right 
now. I am writing this with my legs up against a wall, and my back lying flat on 
a sofa. If I sit up normally, hunched over a notepad or a laptop in the classic 
writer position, my lower back begins to hurt. It doesn’t really help me to know, 
when the pain flares up again, that millions of other people also suffer from back 
problems. 

So why do we bother with love? No matter how much we love someone we 
are never going to make them, or ourselves, free of pain. 

Well, let me tell you something. Something that sounds bland and drippy to 
the untrained eye, but which — I assure you — is something I believe entirely. 
Love saved me. Andrea. She saved me. Her love for me and my love for her. Not 
just once, either. Repeatedly. Over and over. 

We had been together five years by the time I fell ill. What had Andrea gained 
in that time, since the night before her nineteenth birthday? A continued sense of 
financial insecurity? An inadequate, alcohol-impaired sex life? 

At university our friends always considered us to be a happy couple. And we 
were, except for the other half of the time when we were an unhappy couple. 

The interesting thing was that we were fundamentally different people. 
Andrea liked lie-ins and early nights, while I was a bad sleeper and a night owl. 
She had a strong work ethic, and I didn’t (not then, though depression strangely 
has given me one). She liked organisation and I was the most disorganised 
person she had met. Mixing us together was, in some ways, like mixing chlorine 
with ammonia. It simply was not a good idea. 

But I made her laugh, she said. I was ‘fun’. We liked to talk. Both of us, I 
suppose, were quite shy and private people in our own way. Andrea, particularly, 
was a social chameleon. This was a kind of kindness. She never could cope if 
someone felt awkward, and so always bent to meet them as much as she could. I 
think — if I offered her anything — it was the chance to be herself. 


If, as Schopenhauer said, ‘we forfeit three-fourths of ourselves in order to be 


like other people’, then love — at its best — is a way to reclaim those lost parts of 
ourselves. That freedom we lost somewhere quite early in childhood. Maybe 
love is just about finding the person you can be your weird self with. 

I helped her be her, and she helped me be me. We did this through talking. In 
our first year together we would very often stay up all night talking. The night 
would start with us going to the wine shop at the bottom of Sharp Street in Hull 
(the street my student house was on) and buying a bottle of wine we couldn’t 
afford, and would very often end with us watching breakfast TV on my old 
Hitachi, which required constant manoeuvring of the aerial to see the picture. 

Then a year later we had fun playing grown-ups, buying The River Café 
Cookbook and holding dinner parties at which we would serve up panzanella 
salads and expensive wines in our damp-infested student flat. 

Please do not think this was a perfect relationship. It wasn’t. It still isn’t. The 
time we spent living in Ibiza, particularly, now seems to be one long argument. 

Just listen to this: 


‘Matt, wake up.’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Wake up. It’s half-nine.’ 

‘So?’ 

‘T’ve got to be at the office at ten. It’s a forty-five-minute drive.’ 

‘So, no one will know. It’s Ibiza.’ 

“You’re being selfish.’ 

‘T’m being tired.’ 

“You’re hungover. You were drinking vodka lemon all night.’ 

‘Sorry for having a good time. You should try it.’ 

‘Fuck off. I’m getting in the car.’ 

‘What? You can’t leave me in the villa all day. I’ll be stranded in the middle 
of nowhere. There’s no food. Just wait ten minutes!’ 

‘T’m going. I’m just so fed up with you.’ 

‘Why?’ 

“You’re the one who wants to be here. My job is what keeps us here. It’s why 
we’re in this villa.’ 

“You work six days a week. Twelve hours a day. They’re exploiting you. 
They’re still out clubbing. And no one’s in the office till after twelve. They value 
you because you are a maniac. You bend over backwards for them and treat me 
like crap.’ 


‘Bye, Matt.’ 

‘Oh fuck off, you’re not really going, are you?’ 

“You selfish cunt.’ 

‘Okay, I’m getting ready .. . fuck.’ 

But the arguments were surface stuff. If you go deep enough under a tidal 
wave the water is still. That is what we were like. In a way we argued because 
we knew it would have no fundamental impact. When you can be yourself 
around someone, you project your dissatisfied self outwards. And in Ibiza, I was 
that. I was not happy. And part of my personality was this: when I was unhappy, 
I tried to drown myself in pleasure. 

I was — to use the most therapy of terms — in denial. I was denying my 
unhappiness, even as I was being a tetchy, hungover boyfriend. 

There was never a single moment, though, where I would have said — or felt — 
that I didn’t love her. I loved her totally. Friendship-love and love-love. Philia 
and eros. I always had done. Though, of the two, that deep and total friendship- 
love turns out to be the most important. When the depression hit, Andrea was 
there for me. She’d be kind to me and cross with me in all the right ways. 

She was someone I could talk to, someone I could say anything to. Being with 
her was basically being with an outer version of myself. 

The force and fury she’d once only displayed in arguments she now used to 
steer me better. She accompanied me on trips to doctors. She encouraged me to 
ring the right helplines. She got us to move into our own place. She encouraged 
me to read, to write. She earned us money. She gave us time. She handled all the 
organisational side of my life, the stuff you need to do to tick over. 

She filled in the blanks that worry and darkness had left in its wake. She was 
my mind-double. My life-sitter. My literal other half when half of me had gone. 
She covered for me, waiting patiently like a war wife, during my absence from 
myself. 


10. 


How to be there for someone with 
depression or anxiety 


Know that you are needed, and appreciated, even if it seems you are not. 
Listen. 


Never say ‘pull yourself together’ or ‘cheer up’ unless you’re also going to 
provide detailed, foolproof instructions. (Tough love doesn’t work. Turns 
out that just good old ‘love’ is enough.) 


Appreciate that it is an illness. Things will be said that aren’t meant. 


Educate yourself. Understand, above all, that what might seem easy to you 
— going to a shop, for instance — might be an impossible challenge for a 
depressive. 


. Don’t take anything personally, any more than you would take someone 


suffering with the flu or chronic fatigue syndrome or arthritis personally. 
None of this is your fault. 


Be patient. Understand it isn’t going to be easy. Depression ebbs and flows 
and moves up and down. It doesn’t stay still. Do not take one happy/bad 
moment as proof of recovery/relapse. Play the long game. 


. Meet them where they are. Ask what you can do. The main thing you can 


do is just be there. 


. Relieve any work/life pressure if that is doable. 


Where possible, don’t make the depressive feel weirder than they already 
feel. Three days on the sofa? Haven’t opened the curtains? Crying over 


difficult decisions like which pair of socks to wear? So what. No biggie. 
There is no standard normal. Normal is subjective. There are seven billion 
versions of normal on this planet. 


An inconsequential moment 


IT CAME. THE moment I was waiting for. Some time in April 2000. It was totally 
inconsequential. In fact, there is not much to write about. That was the whole 
point. It was a moment of nothingness, of absent-mindedness, of spending 
almost ten seconds awake but not actively thinking of my depression or anxiety. 
I was thinking about work. About trying to get an article published in a 
newspaper. It wasn’t a happy thought, but a neutral one. But it was a break in the 
clouds, a sign that the sun was still there, somewhere. It was over not much after 
it began, but when those clouds came back there was hope. There would be a 
time when those painless seconds would become minutes and hours and maybe 
even days. 


Things that have happened to me that have 
generated more sympathy than depression 


Having tinnitus. 

Scalding my hand on an oven, and having to have my hand in a strange 
ointment-filled glove for a week. 

Accidentally setting my leg on fire. 

Losing a job. 

Breaking a toe. 

Being in debt. 

Having a river flood our nice new house, causing ten thousand pounds’ worth 
of damage. 

Bad Amazon reviews. 

Getting the norovirus. 

Having to be circumcised when I was eleven. 

Lower-back pain. 

Having a blackboard fall on me. 

Irritable bowel syndrome. 


Being a street away from a terrorist attack. 
Eczema. 

Living in Hull in January. 

Relationship break-ups. 

Working in a cabbage-packing warehouse. 
Working in media sales (okay, that came close). 
Consuming a poisoned prawn. 

Three-day migraines. 


Life on Earth to an alien 


IT’S HARD TO explain depression to people who haven’t suffered from it. 

It is like explaining life on Earth to an alien. The reference points just aren’t 
there. You have to resort to metaphors. 

You are trapped in a tunnel. 

You are at the bottom of the ocean. 

You are on fire. 

The main thing is the intensity of it. It does not fit within the normal spectrum 
of emotions. When you are in it, you are really in it. You can’t step outside it 
without stepping outside of life, because it is life. It is your life. Every single 
thing you experience is filtered through it. Consequently, it magnifies 
everything. At its most extreme, things that an everyday normal person would 
hardly notice have overwhelming effects. The sun sinks behind a cloud, and you 
feel that slight change in weather as if a friend has died. You feel the difference 
between inside and outside as a baby feels the difference between womb and 
world. You swallow an ibuprofen and your neurotic brain acts like it has taken 
an overdose of methamphetamine. 

Depression, for me, wasn’t a dulling but a sharpening, an intensifying, as 
though I had been living my life in a shell and now the shell wasn’t there. It was 
total exposure. A red-raw, naked mind. A skinned personality. A brain in a jar 
full of the acid that is experience. What I didn’t realise, at the time, what would 
have seemed incomprehensible to me, was that this state of mind would end up 
having positive effects as well as negative effects. 

I’m not talking about all that What Doesn’t Kill You Makes You Stronger 
stuff. No. That’s simply not true. What doesn’t kill you very often makes you 
weaker. What doesn’t kill you can leave you limping for the rest of your days. 
What doesn’t kill you can make you scared to leave your house, or even your 
bedroom, and have you trembling, or mumbling incoherently, or leaning with 
your head on a window pane, wishing you could return to the time before the 
thing that didn’t kill you. 

No. 

This isn’t a question of strength. Not the stoic, get-on-with-stuff-without- 
thinking-too-much kind of strength, anyway. It’s more of a zooming-in. That 
sharpening. That switch from the prosaic to the poetic. You know, before the age 


of twenty-four I hadn’t known how bad things could feel, but I hadn’t realised 
how good they could feel either. That shell might be protecting you, but it’s also 
stopping you feeling the full force of that good stuff. Depression might be a hell 
of a price to pay for waking up to life, and while it is on top of you it is one that 
could never seem worth paying. Clouds with silver linings are still clouds. But it 
is quite therapeutic to know that pleasure doesn’t just help compensate for pain, 
it can actually grow out of it. 


White space 


WE SPENT THREE long months at my parents’ house, then spent the rest of that 
winter in a cheap flat in a student area of Leeds while Andrea did freelance PR 
work and I tried not to go mad. 

But from, I suppose, April 2000, that good stuff started to become available. 
The bad stuff was still there. At the start, the bad stuff was there most of the 
time. The good stuff probably amounted to about 0.0001 per cent of that April. 
The good stuff was just warm sunshine on my face as Andrea and I walked from 
our flat in the suburbs to the city centre. It lasted as long as the sunshine was 
there and then it disappeared. But from that point on I knew it could be accessed. 
I knew life was available to me again. And so in May 0.0001 per cent became 
about 0.1 per cent. 

I was rising. 

Then, at the start of June, we moved to a flat in the city centre. 


The thing I liked about it was the light. I liked that the walls were white and 
that the unnatural laminated floor mimicked the blondest wood and that the 
square modern windows made up most of the walls and that the low-grade sofa 
the landlord had put in was turquoise. 

Of course, it was still England. It was still Yorkshire. Light was severely 
rationed. But this was as good as it got on our budget, or just above our budget, 
and it was certainly better than the student flat with its burgundy carpets and its 
brown kitchen. Turquoise sofa beat turquoise mould. 

Light was everything. Sunshine, windows with the blinds open. Pages with 
short chapters and lots of white space and 


Short. 
Paragraphs. 
Light was everything. 


But so, increasingly, were books. I read and read and read with an intensity 
I’d never really known before. I mean, I’d always considered myself to be a 
person who liked books. But there is a difference between liking books and 


needing them. I needed books. They weren’t a luxury good during that time in 
my life. They were a Class A addictive substance. I’d have gladly got into 
serious debt to read (indeed, I did). I think I read more books in those six months 
than I had done during five years of university education, and I’d certainly fallen 
deeper into the worlds conjured on the page. 

There is this idea that you either read to escape or you read to find yourself. I 
don’t really see the difference. We find ourselves through the process of 
escaping. It is not where we are, but where we want to go, and all that. ‘Is there 
no way out of the mind?’ Sylvia Path famously asked. I had been interested in 
this question (what it meant, what the answers might be) ever since I had come 
across it as a teenager in a book of quotations. If there is a way out, a way that 
isn’t death itself, then the exit route is through words. But rather than leave the 
mind entirely, words help us leave a mind, and give us the building blocks to 
build another one, similar but better, nearby to the old one but with firmer 
foundations, and very often a better view. 

‘The object of art is to give life a shape,’ said Shakespeare. And my life — and 
my mess of a mind — needed shape. I had ‘lost the plot’. There was no linear 
narrative of me. There was just mess and chaos. So yes, I loved external 
narratives for the hope they offered. Films. TV dramas. And most of all, books. 
They were, in and of themselves, reasons to stay alive. Every book written is the 
product of a human mind in a particular state. Add all the books together and 
you get the end sum of humanity. Every time I read a great book I felt I was 
reading a kind of map, a treasure map, and the treasure I was being directed to 
was in actual fact myself. But each map was incomplete, and I would only locate 
the treasure if I read all the books, and so the process of finding my best self was 
an endless quest. And books themselves seemed to me to reflect this idea. Which 
is why the plot of every book ever can be boiled down to ‘someone is looking 
for something’. 

One cliché attached to bookish people is that they are lonely, but for me books 
were my way out of being lonely. If you are the type of person who thinks too 
much about stuff then there is nothing lonelier in the world than being 
surrounded by a load of people on a different wavelength. 

In my deepest state of depression, I had felt stuck. I felt trapped in quicksand 
(as a kid that had been my most common nightmare). Books were about 
movement. They were about quests and journeys. Beginnings and middles and 
ends, even if not in that order. They were about new chapters. And leaving old 
ones behind. 

And because it was only a few months before that I had lost the point of 
words, and stories, and even language, I was determined never to feel like that 


again. I fed and I fed and I fed. 

I used to sit with the bedside lamp on, reading for about two hours after 
Andrea had gone to sleep, until my eyes were dry and sore, always seeking and 
never quite finding, but with that feeling of being tantalisingly close. 


The Power and the Glory 


ONE OF THE books I remember (re-)reading was The Power and the Glory by 
Graham Greene. 

Graham Greene was an interesting choice. I had studied the writer while doing 
an MA at Leeds University. I don’t know why I took that module. I didn’t really 
know anything about Graham Greene. I knew about Brighton Rock but I’d never 
read it. I’d also heard once that he’d lived in Nottinghamshire and hated it. I had 
lived in Nottinghamshire and — at that time — had often hated it too. Maybe that 
was the reason. 

For the first few weeks I’d thought it was a major mistake. I was the only 
person who’d taken the module. And the tutor hated me. I don’t know if ‘hate’ is 
the word, but he certainly didn’t like me. He was a Catholic, always dressed 
formally, and spoke to me with delicate disdain. 

Those hours were long, and had all the relaxed and casual joy of a trip to the 
doctor’s for a testicular inspection. Often I must have stank of beer, as I would 
always drink a can or two on the train journey to Leeds (from Hull, where 
Andrea and I were still living). At the end of the module I wrote the best essay I 
had ever written, and was given a 69 per cent. One shy of a distinction. I took it 
as a personal insult. 

Anyway, I loved Graham Greene. His works were filled with a discomfort I 
related to. There were all kinds of discomforts on offer. Discomforts of guilt, 
sex, Catholicism, unrequited love, forbidden lust, tropical heat, politics, war. 
Everything was uncomfortable, except the prose. 

I loved the way he wrote. I loved the way he’d compare a solid thing to 
something abstract. ‘He drank the brandy down like damnation.’ I loved this 
technique even more now, because the divide between the material and non- 
material worlds seemed to have blurred. With depression. Even my own physical 
body seemed unreal and abstract and partly fictional. 

The Power and the Glory is about a ‘whisky priest’ travelling through Mexico 
in the 1930s, at a time when Catholicism is outlawed. Throughout the novel he is 
pursued by a police lieutenant tasked with tracking him down. 


I had liked this story when I first read it at university, but I loved it now. 


Having been a borderline alcoholic in Ibiza, empathising with a borderline 
alcoholic in Mexico wasn’t too hard. 

It is a dark, intense book. But when you are feeling dark and intense these are 
the only kind of books that can speak to you. Yet there was an optimism too. The 
possibility of redemption. It is a book about the healing power of love. 

‘Hate is a lack of imagination,’ we are told. 

But also: “There is always one moment in childhood when the door opens and 
lets the future in.’ Experience surrounds innocence and innocence can never be 
regained once lost. The book is about — like many of his books — Catholic guilt. 
But for me it was about depression. Greene was a depressive. Had been since a 
child, being bullied at the school where his unpopular father was headmaster. 
He’d semi-attempted suicide with a solitary game of Russian roulette. The guilt 
was — for me — not the spiritual guilt of Catholicism but the psychological guilt 
that depression brings. And it helped relieve the isolation that the illness brings. 


* 


Other books I read at this time: 

Invisible Cities, Italo Calvino — The most beautiful book. Imaginary cities, 
each kind of like Venice but not at all like Venice. Dreams on a page. So unreal 
they could almost dislodge my strange mind-visions. 

The Outsiders, S.E. Hinton — The book that got me properly into reading as a 
ten-year-old. Has always been my favourite ‘escape’ read. It drips with America 
and has gorgeously sentimental dialogue. (Like: ‘Stay gold, Ponyboy’, said by 
Johnny, on his death bed, after reading Robert Frost’s ‘Nothing Gold Can Stay’.) 

The Outsider, Albert Camus — I had a thing about outsiders. And existential 
despair. The numbness of the prose was strangely soothing. 

The Concise Collins Dictionary of Quotations — Quotations are easy to read. 

Letters of Keats — I had studied Keats at university. The archetypal young poet 
was thin-skinned and doomed and intense, and I felt these things. 

Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, Jeanette Winterson — I loved Jeanette’s 
writing. Every word contained strength or wisdom. I picked it up at random 
pages to see sentences that could speak to me. ‘I seem to have run in a great 
circle, and met myself again on the starting line.’ 

Vox, Nicholson Baker — A novel that consists entirely of an episode of phone 
sex, that had titillated and enthralled me when I was sixteen. Pure dialogue. 
Again, easy to read, and full of sex, or the idea of sex, and for a young, anxiety- 
riddled mind, thinking of sex can be a positive distraction. 

Money, Martin Amis — Money was a book I knew inside out. I’d done essays 


on it. It was full of ballsy, swaggering, sharp, funny, macho (though sometimes 
rather hateful) prose. There was an intensity to it. And sad beauty amid the 
comedy. (‘Every hour you get weaker. Sometimes, as I sit alone in my flat in 
London and stare at the window, I think how dismal it is, how heavy, to watch 
the rain and not know why it falls.’) 

The Diary of Samuel Pepys — In particular, I’d read the bit about the Great 
Fire and the plague. There was something about the way Pepys jollied on 
through the more apocalyptic events of seventeenth-century life that was very 
therapeutic to read about. 

The Catcher in the Rye, J.D. Salinger — Because Holden was an old friend. 


The Penguin Book of First World War Poetry — Poems like Ivor Gurney’s 
‘Strange Hells’ (‘The heart burns — but has to keep out of face how heart burns’) 
and Wilfred Owen’s ‘Mental Cases’ (describing the shell-shocked patients of a 
mental hospital) fascinated me but troubled me. I had been through no war and 
yet I related to that feeling of pain contained in every new day, as ‘Dawn breaks 
open like a wound that bleeds afresh’. It fascinated me how depression and 
anxiety overlap with post-traumatic stress disorder. Had we been through some 
trauma we didn’t know about? Was the noise and speed of modern life the 
trauma for our caveman brains? Was I that soft? Or was life a kind of war most 
people didn’t see? 

A History of the World in Ten and a Half Chapters, Julian Barnes — Just 
because it was a book I had read and loved before and which was funny and 
strange and I knew it inside out. 

Wilderness Tips, Margaret Atwood — Short stories. Smaller hills to climb. A 
story called “True Trash’ was my favourite. About teenage boys perving at 
waitresses. 

Wide Sargasso Sea, Jean Rhys — A prequel to Jane Eyre. About the 
‘madwoman in the attic’ and her descent into madness. It is mainly set in the 
Caribbean. The despair and isolation felt in paradise was what I related to most, 
to feeling terrible ‘in the most beautiful place in the world’, which reminded me 
of that last week in Spain. 


Paris 


SHE WAS ABOUT to tell me my birthday surprise. 

“‘We’re going to Paris. Tomorrow. We’re going to Paris tomorrow! We’re 
going to get the Eurostar.’ 

I was shell-shocked. I couldn’t imagine anyone saying anything more 
terrifying. ‘I can’t. I can’t go to Paris.’ 

It was happening. A panic attack. I was starting to feel it in my chest. I was 
starting to feel like I was back in 2000 mode. Back in that feeling of being 
trapped inside my self, like a desperate fly in a jar. 

‘Well, we’re going. We’re staying in the sixth. It’s going to be great. We’re 
staying in the hotel Oscar Wilde died in. L’ Hotel, it’s called.’ 

Going to the place where Oscar Wilde died wasn’t making it any better. It just 
guaranteed I was going to die there. To die in Paris, just like Oscar Wilde. I also 
imagined the air would kill me. I hadn’t been abroad for four years. 


‘T don’t think I’ll be able to breathe the air.’ I knew this sounded stupid. I 
wasn’t mad! And yet, the fact remained: I didn’t think I’d be able to breathe the 
air. 

At some point after that I was curled tight in a foetal ball behind the door. I 
was trembling. I don’t know if anyone had been this scared of Paris since Marie 
Antoinette. But Andrea knew what to do. She had a PhD in this kind of thing by 
now. She said: ‘Okay, we won’t go. I can cancel the hotel. We might lose a bit 
of money, but if it’s such a big deal .. .’ 

Such a big deal. 

I could still hardly walk twenty metres on my own without having a panic 
attack. It was the biggest deal imaginable. It was like, I suppose, a normal person 
being told they had to walk naked around Tehran or something. 

But. 

If I said ‘no’, then I would be a person who couldn’t travel abroad because he 
was scared. And that would make me like a mad person, and my biggest fear — 
bigger even than death — was of being totally mad. Of losing myself completely 
to the demons. So, as was so often the case, a big fear was beaten by a bigger 
fear. 


The best way to beat a monster is to find a scarier one. 


And I went to Paris. The Channel tunnel held together and the sea didn’t fall 
on our heads. The air in Paris worked okay with my lungs. Though I could 
hardly speak in the taxi. The journey from Gare du Nord to the hotel was 
intense. There was some kind of march going on by the banks of the Seine, with 
a large red flag swooping like the Tricolore in Les Miserables. 

When I closed my eyes that night I couldn’t sleep for hours because I kept 
seeing Paris moving at the speed it had moved by in the taxi. But I calmed. I 
didn’t actually have a proper panic attack at any point during the next four days. 
Just a generalised high anxiety that I felt walking around the Left Bank and 
along the Rue de Rivoli and in the restaurant on the roof of the Pompidou 
Centre. I was starting to find that, sometimes, simply doing something that I had 
dreaded — and surviving — was the best kind of therapy. If you start to dread 
being outside, go outside. If you fear confined spaces, spend some time in a lift. 
If you have separation anxiety, force yourself to be alone a while. When you are 
depressed and anxious your comfort zone tends to shrink from the size of a 
world to the size of a bed. Or right down to nothing at all. 

Another thing. Stimulation. Excitement. The kinds found in new places. 
Sometimes this can be terrifying, but it can also be liberating. In a familiar place, 
your mind focuses solely on itself. There is nothing new it needs to notice about 
your bedroom. No potential external threats, just internal ones. By forcing 
yourself into a new physical space, preferably in a different country, you end up 
inevitably focusing a bit more on the world outside your head. 

Well, that’s how it worked for me. Those few days in Paris. 

In fact, I felt more normal than I did at home, because here my general 
anxious awkwardness could pass quite easily for general awkward Britishness. 

A lot of depressed people turn to travel as an antidote to their symptoms. The 
great American painter Georgia O’ Keeffe, like the many other artists that fit the 
cliché, was a life-long depressive. In 1933, at the age of forty-six, she was 
hospitalised following symptoms of uncontrollable crying, a seeming inability to 
eat or sleep, and other symptoms of depression and anxiety. 

O’Keeffe’s biographer Roxana Robinson says that the hospital stay did little 
for her. What worked instead was travel. She went to Bermuda and Lake George 
in New York and Maine and Hawaii. ‘Warmth, languor, and solitude were just 
what Georgia needed,’ wrote Robinson. 

Of course, travel isn’t always a solution. Or even an option. But it certainly 


helps me, when I get the chance to go away. I think, more than anything, it helps 
give a sense of perspective. We might be stuck in our minds, but we aren’t 
physically stuck. And unsticking ourselves from our physical location can help 
dislodge our unhappy mental state. Movement is the antidote to fixedness, after 
all. And it helps. Sometimes. Just sometimes. 

‘Travel makes one modest,’ said Gustave Flaubert. ‘You see what a tiny place 
you occupy in the world.’ Such perspective can be strangely liberating. 
Especially when you have an illness that may on the one hand lower self-esteem, 
but on the other intensifies the trivial. 

I can remember during a short depressive episode watching Martin Scorsese’s 
Howard Hughes biopic The Aviator. There is a point in it where Katharine 
Hepburn, played rather brilliantly by Cate Blanchett, turns to Hughes (Leonardo 
DiCaprio) and says: ‘There’s too much Howard Hughes in Howard Hughes.’ It 
was this intensity of the self that, in the film version of his life at least, was 
shown to contribute to the obsessive-compulsive disorder that would eventually 
imprison Hughes in a hotel room in Las Vegas. 


Andrea told me after that film that there was too much Matt Haig in Matt 
Haig. She was kind of joking, but also kind of on to something. So for me, 
anything that lessens that extreme sense of self, that makes me feel me but at a 
lower volume, is very welcome. And ever since that Paris trip, travel has been 
one of those things. 


Reasons to be Strong rrwas 2002. 1 was at that point in my 


recovery where I was continually feeling well, but only in contrast to the much 
worse stuff that had gone before. Really, I was still a walking mass of anxiety, 
too phobic to take medicine of any kind, and convinced my tongue was 
expanding every time I consumed prawns or peanut butter or any other food it is 
possible to be allergic to. I also needed to be near Andrea. If I was near Andrea I 
was infinitely calmer than when I wasn’t. 

Most of the time, this didn’t make me feel like a weirdo. Me and Andrea lived 
together and worked together in the same modest apartment. We did not really 
know anyone socially. Out of the two of us, I had always been the one with the 
drive to go out and meet other people, and that drive had gone now. 

But in 2002 Andrea’s mother was diagnosed with ovarian cancer and things 
understandably changed. We went and stayed with her parents in County 
Durham while Freda underwent chemotherapy. Andrea, who had spent the last 
three years fixing a depressive boyfriend, now had a mother with cancer. 

She cried a lot. I felt like the baton was being passed. This was my turn to be 
the strong one. 

When she first found out her mum was ill she sat on the edge of the bed and 
cried like I had never seen her cry. I put my arm around her and felt that sudden 
shrinking of language you feel when something terrible happens. Fortunately, 
Andrea was on hand to help. 

‘Just say it’s going to be okay,’ she said. 

‘It’s going to be okay.’ 

Two months later, I was alone in the house of my future in-laws, pleading 
with Andrea to go with them to the hospital. 

‘T’ve got to take Mum to hospital,’ she had said. 

‘Okay. I’ll come with you.’ 

‘They want someone to wait and let David in.’ David was Andrea’s brother, 
travelling up from London. 

‘I can come with you.’ 

‘Matt, please.’ 


‘T can’t do this. Separation anxiety. I’ll have a panic attack.’ 
‘Matt, I’m asking you. My mum’s ill. I don’t want to stress her out. You’re 


being selfish.’ 

‘Fuck. Shit. I’m sorry. But you don’t understand.’ 

“You can do this.’ 

‘T won’t make it. Can’t you just tell your mum and dad I’ve got to come too?’ 

‘Okay. All right. Okay. I will.’ 

But then it happened. A switch flicked. ‘No.’ 

‘No what?’ 

‘T’ll do it. P’ll stay. I'll stay in the house.’ 

‘Really?’ 

“Yeah.” 

‘T’ll leave the number for the hospital.’ 

‘It’s okay,’ I said, stupidly imagining these could be my last ever words to 
her. ‘I could find it.’ 

‘T’'ll leave it anyway.’ 

‘Thank you.’ 

‘It’s okay. You’d better go.’ 

While waiting for them to come home with Andrea from the hospital I paced 
from room to room. They had lots of porcelain ornaments. Little Bo Peep. A 
Pink Panther sitting cross-legged, his legs hanging down off the windowsill. His 
wide yellow eyes followed me around the living room. 

The first ten minutes my heart was pounding. I could hardly breathe. Andrea 
was dead. Her parents were dead. I was picturing the car crash too vividly for it 
not to have happened. Then twenty minutes passed. I was going to die. There 
was a pain in my chest. Maybe it was lung cancer. I was only twenty-seven, but I 
had smoked a lot. At thirty minutes, a neighbour came around to see how Freda 
was. At forty minutes, the adrenaline was starting to settle. I had been forty 
minutes on my own and I was still alive. By fifty minutes, I actually wanted 
them to be gone over an hour, so that I could feel even stronger. Fifty minutes! 
Three years of separation anxiety cured in less than an hour! 

Needless to say, they came back. 


It was a horrible summer, but the outcome was okay. Andrea’s mother was given 
terrible odds, but she beat them. We even managed to replace her daily breakfast 
of a biscuit with a kiwi fruit. I had reasons to force myself to be strong. To put 
myself in situations I wouldn’t have put myself in. You need to be 
uncomfortable. You need to hurt. As the Persian poet Rumi wrote in the twelfth 
century, “The wound is the place where the light enters you.’ (He also wrote: 
‘Forget safety. Live where you fear to live.’) Also, I channelled my mind by 
writing my first proper novel. Not principally for career reasons (the novel was a 


reworking of Shakespeare’s Henry IV, with talking dogs, so hardly bestseller 
territory), but to occupy myself. Two years later, though, and with Andrea’s 
encouragement, it would be an actual published book. I dedicated the book to 
Andrea, obviously, but it wasn’t just a book I owed her. It was a whole life. 


We dDODS wy acenr. ‘you’ve got a publisher.’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Just had the phone call. You are going to be a published author.’ 

‘What? Seriously?’ 

‘Seriously.’ 

This news kept me going for about six months. 

For about six months my lack of self-esteem had been artificially addressed. I 
would lie in bed and go to sleep smiling, thinking Wow, I’m quite a big deal, I’m 
going to be published. 

But being published (or getting a great job or whatever) does not permanently 
alter your brain. And one night I lay awake, feeling less than happy. I started to 
worry. The worries spiralled. And for three weeks I was trapped in my own mind 
again. But this time, I had weapons. One of them, maybe the most important, 
was this knowledge: I have been ill before, then well again. Wellness is possible. 
Another weapon was running. I knew how the body could affect the mind, so I 
started to run more and more. 


Running 


RUNNING IS A commonly cited alleviator of depression and anxiety. It certainly 
worked for me. When I started running I was still getting very bad panic attacks. 
The thing I liked about it was that many of the physical symptoms of panic — the 
racing heart, the problematic breathing, the sweating — are matched by running. 
So while I was running I wouldn’t be worried about my racing heart because it 
had a reason to be racing. 

Also, it gave me something to think about. I was never exactly the fittest 
person in the world, so running was quite difficult. It hurt. But that effort and 
discomfort was a great focuser. And so I convinced myself that through training 
my body I was also training my mind. It was a kind of active meditation. 

It also, of course, gets you fit. And getting fit is pretty much good for 
everything. When I became ill I had been drinking and smoking heavily, but 
now I was trying to undo that damage. 

So every day I would go running, or do an equivalent type of cardiovascular 
exercise. Like Haruki Murakami — whose excellent book What I Talk About 
When I Talk About Running I would later read — I found running to be a way of 
clearing the fog. (‘Exerting yourself to the fullest within your individual limits: 
that’s the essence of running,’ Murakami also said, which is something I’ve 
come to believe too, and is one of the reasons I believe it helps the mind.) 

I would come back from a run and stretch and have a shower and feel a gentle 
sense of release, as though depression and anxiety were slowly evaporating from 
inside me. It was a wonderful feeling. Also, that kind of monotony that running 
generates — the one soundtracked by heavy breathing and the steady rhythm of 
feet on pavements — became a kind of metaphor for depression. To go on a run 
every day is to have a kind of battle with yourself. Just getting out on a cold 
February morning gives you a sense of achievement. But that voiceless debate 
you have with yourself — I want to stop! No, keep going! I can’t, I can hardly 
breathe! There’s only a mile to go! I just need to lie down! You can’t! — is the 
debate of depression, but on a smaller and less serious scale. So for me, each 
time I forced myself out there in the cold grey damp of a West Yorkshire 
morning, and pushed myself to run for an hour, it gave me a little bit of 
depression-beating power. A little bit of that ‘you’d better be careful with who 
you are messing with’ spirit. 


It helped, sometimes. Not always. It wasn’t foolproof. I wasn’t Zeus. There 
were no magic thunderbolts at my disposal. But it is nice to build up, over the 
years, things that you know do — on occasion — work. Weapons for the war that 
subsides but that can always ignite again. And so writing, reading, talking, 
travelling, yoga, meditation and running were some of mine. 


The brain is the body — part two 


I BELIEVE THAT the term ‘mental illness’ is misleading, as it implies all the 
problems that happen, happen above the neck. With depression, and with anxiety 
in particular, a lot of the problems may be generated by the mind, and aggravate 
the mind, but have physical effects. 

For instance, the NHS website lists these as the psychological symptoms of 
generalised anxiety disorder: 


restlessness 

a sense of dread 

feeling constantly ‘on edge’ 
difficulty concentrating 
irritability 

impatience 

being easily distracted 


But interestingly the NHS gives a much longer list for the physical symptoms: 


dizziness 

drowsiness and tiredness 

pins and needles 

irregular heartbeat (palpitations) 
muscle aches and tension 

dry mouth 

excessive sweating 

shortness of breath 

stomach ache 

nausea 

diarrhoea 

headache 

excessive thirst 

frequent urinating 

painful or missed periods 
difficulty falling or staying asleep (insomnia) 


One symptom missing from the NHS list, but found on others, is both physical 
and mental. Derealisation. It is a very real symptom that makes you feel, well, 
not real. You don’t feel fully inside yourself. You feel like you are controlling 
your body from somewhere else. It is like the distance between a writer and their 
fictional, semi-autobiographical narrator. The centre that is you has gone. It is a 
feeling of the mind and the body, once again proving to the sufferer that to 
separate the two as crudely as we do is wrong, and simplistic. And maybe even 
part of the problem. 


Famous people DEPRESSION MAKES YOU feel alone. That’s one of its 


main symptoms. So it helps to know you are not alone. Given the nature of our 
society, and a confessional celebrity culture, it is often famous people that we 
hear about having troubles. But it doesn’t matter. The more we hear, the better. 
Well, not always. Being a writer, I don’t particularly like thinking about Ernest 
Hemingway and what he did with his gun, or Sylvia Plath’s head in her oven. I 
didn’t even like contemplating too deeply non-writer Vincent Van Gogh and his 
ear. And when I heard about a contemporary writer I admired, David Foster 
Wallace, hanging himself on 12 September 2008 it actually sparked in me my 
worst bout of depression since the really Bad Times. And it doesn’t have to be 
writers. I was one of millions of people not just saddened by Robin Williams’ 
death, but scared of it, as if it somehow made it more likely for us to end up the 
same way. 


But then, most people with depression — even most famous people with 
depression — don’t end up committing suicide. Mark Twain suffered depression 
and died of a heart attack. Tennessee Williams died from accidentally choking 
on the cap of a bottle of eye drops that he frequently used. 

Sometimes just looking at names of people who have suffered depression — or 
are still suffering depression — but who clearly have (or had) other things that are 
great going on in their lives, gives a kind of comfort. So here is my list: Buzz 
Aldrin 


Halle Berry 


Zach Braff 


Russell Brand 


Frank Bruno 


Alastair Campbell Jim Carrey 
Winston Churchill Richard Dreyfuss Carrie Fisher 
F, Scott Fitzgerald 


Stephen Fry 


Judy Garland 


Jon Hamm 


Anne Hathaway 


Billy Joel 


Angelina Jolie Stephen King 
Abraham Lincoln Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Isaac Newton 


Al Pacino 


Gwyneth Paltrow Dolly Parton 
Princess Diana Christina Ricci Teddy Roosevelt Winona Ryder 


Brooke Shields Charles Shulz 


Ben Stiller 


William Styron Emma Thompson 


Uma Thurman 


Marcus Trescothick Ruby Wax 

Robbie Williams Tennessee Williams Catherine Zeta-Jones And what does this 
teach us? That depression can happen to prime ministers and presidents and 
cricketers and playwrights and boxers and the stars of hit Hollywood comedies. 
Well, we knew that. What else? That fame and money do not immunise you 
from mental health problems. We kind of knew that too. Maybe it is not about 
teaching us anything except that knowing about Jim Carrey’s time on Prozac or 
Princess Leia’s bipolar disorder helps us because, while we know it can happen 
to anyone, we can never be told too many times that it can actually happen to 
anyone. 

I remember sitting in a dentist’s reading an interview with Halle Berry in 
which she was talking openly about the time she sat in her car, in a garage, and 
tried to kill herself via carbon monoxide poisoning. She told the interviewer that 
the only thing that stopped her was the thought of her mother finding her. 


It helped me, seeing her smiling and looking strong in that magazine. It may 
have been a Photoshopped illusion, but whatever, she was alive and seemingly 
happy, and a member of the same species as me. So yes, we like stories of 
recovery. We love the narrative structure of rise-fall-rise-again. Celebrity 
magazines run these stories endlessly. 

There is a lot of cynicism about depressed celebrities, as if after a certain 
amount of success and money a human being becomes immune to mental 
illnesses. It is only mental illnesses that people seem to say this about. They 
don’t say it about the flu, for instance. Unlike a book or a film depression 
doesn’t have to be about something. 

Also, one of the things depression often does is make you feel guilt. 
Depression says ‘Look at you, with your nice life, with your nice 
boyfriend/girlfriend/husband/ wife/kids/dog/sofa/Twitter followers, with your 
good job, with your lack of physical health problems, with your holiday in Rome 
to look forward to, with your mortgage nearly paid off, with your non-divorced 
parents, with your whatever,’ on and on and on. 

Actually, depression can be exacerbated by things being all right externally, 
because the gulf between what you are feeling and what you are expected to feel 
becomes larger. If you feel the same amount of depression as someone would 
naturally feel in a prisoner of war camp, but you are not in a prisoner of war 
camp, and are instead in a nice semi-detached house in the free world, then you 
think ‘Crap, this is everything I ever wanted, why aren’t I happy?’ 


You may find yourself, as in the Talking Heads song, in a beautiful house, 
with a beautiful wife, wondering how you got there. Watching the days. 
Wondering how things get on top. Wondering what is missing. Wondering if 
every thing we have wanted in our lives has been the wrong thing. Wondering if 
the smartphones and nice bathrooms and state-of-the-art TVs we thought were 
part of the solution are part of the problem. Wondering if, in the board game of 
life, everything we thought was a ladder was in fact a snake, sliding us right 
down to the bottom. As any Buddhist would tell you, an over-attachment to 
material things will lead only to more suffering. 

It is said that insanity is a logical response to an insane world. Maybe 
depression is in part simply a response to a life we don’t really understand. Of 
course, no one understands their life completely if they think about it. An 
annoying thing about depression is that thinking about life is inevitable. 
Depression makes thinkers out of all of us. Just ask Abraham Lincoln. 


Abraham Lincoln and the fearful gift 


ABRAHAM LINCOLN, WHEN he was thirty-two, declared: ‘I am now the most 
miserable man living.’ He had, by that age, experienced two massive depressive 
breakdowns. 

‘If what I feel were equally distributed to the whole human family, there 
would not be one cheerful face on the earth. Whether I shall ever be better I can 
not tell; I awfully forbode I shall not. To remain as I am is impossible. I must die 
or be better.’ 

Yet, of course, while Lincoln openly declared he had no fear of suicide, he did 
not kill himself. He chose to live. 

There is a great article on ‘Lincoln’s Great Depression’ in The Atlantic by 
Joshua Wolf Shenk. In it, Shenk writes of how depression forced Lincoln into a 
deeper understanding of life: 


He insisted on acknowledging his fears. Through his late twenties and early thirties he drove deeper 
and deeper into them, hovering over what, according to Albert Camus, is the only serious question 
human beings have to deal with. He asked whether he could live, whether he could face life’s misery. 
Finally he decided that he must . . . He had an ‘irrepressible desire’ to accomplish something while 
he lived. 


He was evidently a serious person. One of the great serious people of history. He 
fought mental wars and physical ones. Maybe his knowledge of suffering led to 
the kind of empathy he showed when seeking to change the law on slavery. 
(‘Wherever I hear anyone arguing for slavery, I feel a strong impulse to see it 
tried on him personally,’ he said.) 

Lincoln is not the only famous leader to have battled depression. Winston 
Churchill lived with the ‘black dog’ for much of his life too. Watching a fire, he 
once remarked to a young researcher he was employing: ‘I know why logs spit. I 
know what it is to be consumed.’ 

Indeed he did. He was — in terms of career achievements — one of the most 
active men who ever lived. Yet he continually felt despondent and full of 
darkness. 

The political philosopher John Gray — one of my favourite non-fiction writers 
(read Straw Dogs to see why) — believes Churchill didn’t ‘overcome’ depression 
to become a good war leader, rather that the experience of depression directly 
enabled him to be one. 


Gray argues, in an article for the BBC, that it was Churchill’s ‘exceptional 
openness’ to intense emotion that explains how he was able to sense dangers that 
more conventional minds failed to see. ‘For most of the politicians and opinion- 
makers who wanted to appease Hitler, the Nazis were not much more than a 
raucous expression of German nationalism,’ writes Gray. It needed an unusual 
mind to address an unusual threat. ‘He owed his foresight of the horror that was 
to come to visits of the black dog.’ 

So, yes, depression is a nightmare. But can it also be a useful one? Can it be 
one that improves the world in various ways? 

Sometimes the links between depression, anxiety and productivity are 
undeniable. Think of Edvard Munch’s omnipresent painting The Scream, for 
instance. Not only is this a most accurate visual depiction of what a panic attack 
feels like, but it was also — according to the artist himself — directly inspired by a 
moment of existential terror. Here is the diary entry: 


I was walking down the road when the sun set; suddenly, the sky turned as red as blood. I stopped 
and leaned against the fence, feeling unspeakably tired. Tongues of fire and blood stretched over the 
bluish black fjord. My friends went on walking, while I lagged behind, shivering with fear. Then I 
heard the enormous, infinite scream of nature. 


But even without the ‘smoking gun’ of a specific depressive episode inspiring a 
specific work of genius, it is impossible to ignore the sheer number of greats 
who have battled depression. Even without focusing on the Plaths and 
Hemingways and Woolfs who actually killed themselves, the list of known 
depressives is staggering. And many times there is a link between the illness and 
the work they produce. 

A lot of Freud’s work was based on his analysis of his own depression, and 
what he believed to be the solution. Cocaine was what worked for him, but then 
— after dishing it out to other sufferers — he started to realise it could be a tad 
addictive. 

Franz Kafka is another member of the Depression Hall of Fame. He suffered 
from social anxiety and what people now see as clinical depression all his life. 
He was also a hypochondriac living in fear of physical and mental change. But 
being a hypochondriac doesn’t mean you won’t get ill, and when he was thirty- 
four Kafka contracted tuberculosis. Interestingly, all the things that were known 
to help Kafka’s depression — swimming, horse riding, hiking — were physically 
healthy pursuits. 

Surely the claustrophobia and sense of powerlessness in his works — so often 
interpreted in solely political terms — was also a result of him suffering from an 


illness that makes you feel claustrophobic? 

Kafka’s most famous story is The Metamorphosis. A travelling salesman 
wakes up to find himself transformed into a giant insect, who has overslept and 
is late for work. It is a story about the dehumanising effect of capitalism, yes, but 
it can equally be read as a metaphor for depression, the most Kafkaesque of 
illnesses. For, like Gregor Samsa, the depressive can sometimes wake up in the 
room they fell asleep in, and yet feel totally different. An alien to themselves. 
Trapped in a nightmare. 

Likewise, could Emily Dickinson have written her poem ‘I felt a Funeral, in 
my Brain’ without deep mental anguish? Of course, most depressives don’t end 
up being a Lincoln or a Dickinson or a Churchill or a Munch or a Freud or a 
Kafka (or a Mark Twain or a Sylvia Plath or a Georgia O’ Keeffe or an Ian Curtis 
or a Kurt Cobain). But then, nor do most people. 


People often use the word ‘despite’ in the context of mental illness. So-and-so 
did such-and-such despite having 
depression/anxiety/OCD/agoraphobia/whatever. But sometimes that ‘despite’ 
should be a ‘because’. For instance, I write because of depression. I was not a 
writer before. The intensity needed — to explore things with relentless curiosity 
and energy — simply wasn’t there. Fear makes us curious. Sadness makes us 
philosophise. (“To be or not to be?’ is a daily question for many depressives. ) 

Going back to Abraham Lincoln, the key thing to note is that the president 
always suffered with depression. He never fully overcame it, but he lived 
alongside it and achieved great things. ‘Whatever greatness Lincoln achieved 
cannot be explained as a triumph over personal suffering,’ says Joshua Wolf 
Shenk in that article I mentioned. ‘Rather, it must be accounted an outgrowth of 
the same system that produced that suffering . . . Lincoln didn’t do great work 
because he solved the problem of his melancholy; the problem of his melancholy 
was all the more fuel for the fire of his great work.’ 

So. Even if depression is not totally overcome, we can learn to use what the 
poet Byron called a ‘fearful gift’. 

We don’t have to use it to rule a nation, like Churchill or Lincoln. We don’t 
even have to use it to paint a really good picture. 

We can just use it in life. For instance, I find that being grimly aware of 
mortality can make me steadfastly determined to enjoy life where life can be 
enjoyed. It makes me value precious moments with my children, and with the 
woman I love. It adds intensity in bad ways, but also good ways. 

Art and political vigour are just one spill-over of that intensity, but it can 
manifest itself in a million other ways, most of which won’t make you famous 


but many of which will, in the long term, add as well as take away. 


Depression is... 


An internal war. 

A black dog (thanks, Winston Churchill and Dr Johnson). 

A black hole. 

An invisible fire. 

A pressure cooker. 

A devil inside. 

A prison. 

An absence. 

A bell jar (‘I would be sitting under the same glass bell jar,’ wrote Plath, 
‘stewing in my own sour air’). 

A malicious code in the operating system of your mind. 

A parallel universe. 

A life-long fight. 

A by-product of mortality. 

A living nightmare. 

An echo chamber. 

Dark and hopeless and lonely. 


A collision between an ancient mind and a modern world (evolutionary 


psychology). 
A fucking pain. 


Depression is also... 


Smaller than you. 

Always, it is smaller than you, even when it feels vast. It operates within you, 
you do not operate within it. It may be a dark cloud passing across the sky, but — 
if that is the metaphor — you are the sky. 

You were there before it. And the cloud can’t exist without the sky, but the 
sky can exist without the cloud. 


A conversation across time — part three ren 
ME: It’s terrifying. 

NOW ME: What is? 
THEN ME: Life. My mind. The weight of it. 
NOW ME: Shhh. Stop that. You are just a bit trapped inside a moment. The 
moment will change. 
THEN ME: Andrea will leave me. 
NOW ME: No. No, she won’t. She’ll marry you. 
THEN ME: Ha! As if anyone would tie themselves to a useless freak like me. 
Would they? 
NOW ME: Yes. And look, you are making progress. You go to the shop now and 
you don’t have a panic attack. You don’t feel that weight on you all the time. 
THEN ME: I do. 
NOW ME: No. There was that time last week when I — when you — were out in the 
sunshine walking through the park, and you felt a lightness. A moment you 
weren’t really thinking. 
THEN ME: Actually, yes. Yes. That’s true. I had another this morning. I was lying 
in bed just wondering if we had any cereal left. That was it. It was just a normal 
thing, and it lasted over a minute. Just lying there, thinking about breakfast. 
NOW ME: See? So you know things aren’t always going to be the same. I mean, 
things today weren’t always the same. 
THEN ME: But it’s still so intense. 
NOW ME: And it always will be. You will always be quite intense. And the 
depression might always be there, waiting for the next fall. But there is so much 
life waiting for you. The one thing depression has told you is that a day can be a 
long and intense stretch of time. 
THEN ME: Oh God, yes. 
NOW ME: Well, then, don’t worry about the passing of time. There can be infinity 
inside a day. 
THEN ME: I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite 
Space. 
NOW ME: Hamlet? Impressive. I’ve forgotten all those lines by now. It’s been a 
long time since university. 


THEN ME: I am starting to believe in you. 

NOW ME: Thank you. 

THEN ME: I mean, the possibility of you. The possibility that I exist more than a 
decade in the future. And that I feel a lot better. 

NOW ME: It’s true. You do. And you have a family of your own. You have a life. 
It is not perfect. No human life is. But it is yours. 

THEN ME: | want proof. 

NOW ME: I can’t prove it. There is no time machine. 

THEN ME: No. I suppose I’ ll just have to hope. 

NOW ME: Yes. Have faith. 

THEN ME: I’ II try. 

NOW ME: You already have. 














Living 


‘And thus the heart will break, yet brokenly live on’ 
—Lord Byron, Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage 


The world 


THE WORLD Is increasingly designed to depress us. Happiness isn’t very good for 
the economy. If we were happy with what we had, why would we need more? 
How do you sell an anti-ageing moisturiser? You make someone worry about 
ageing. How do you get people to vote for a political party? You make them 
worry about immigration. How do you get them to buy insurance? By making 
them worry about everything. How do you get them to have plastic surgery? By 
highlighting their physical flaws. How do you get them to watch a TV show? By 
making them worry about missing out. How do you get them to buy a new 
smartphone? By making them feel like they are being left behind. 

To be calm becomes a kind of revolutionary act. To be happy with your own 
non-upgraded existence. To be comfortable with our messy, human selves, 
would not be good for business. 


Yet we have no other world to live in. And actually, when we really look 
closely, the world of stuff and advertising is not really life. Life is the other stuff. 
Life is what is left when you take all that crap away, or at least ignore it for a 
while. 

Life is the people who love you. No one will ever choose to stay alive for an 
iPhone. It’s the people we reach via the iPhone that matter. 

And once we begin to recover, and to live again, we do so with new eyes. 
Things become clearer, and we are aware of things we weren’t aware of before. 


Mushroom clouds 


I NEVER SAW the double-whammy of anxiety and depression coming before it 
knocked me out when I was twenty-four. But I should have done. The warning 
signs were all there. The moments of despair as a teenager. The continual 
worrying about everything. In particular, I believe there were also a lot warning 
signs while I was a student at Hull University. The trouble with warning signs, 
though, is that we only have the past to go on, not the future, and if something 
hasn’t actually happened it is hard to know that it will. 

The advantage of having had depression is that you know what to look for, 
and there was plenty to spot while I was at uni, but I never noticed it. 

I used to stare into space, while sitting on the fifth floor of the university 
library, imagining, with a kind of bleak terror, mushroom clouds on the horizon. 
I used to feel slightly strange sometimes. Blurred around the edges, as if I was a 
walking watercolour. And I did need to drink a lot of alcohol, now I think about 
it. 

I also had what was a panic attack, though not on the scale of the later ones. 
Here is what happened. 

As part of my joint English—History degree I took a module on Art History. 
Though I didn’t realise it at the time, that meant that at some point in the term I 
would have to do a presentation on a modern art movement (I chose Cubism). 

It sounds like nothing, but I was dreading it as much as you could dread 
anything. I had always been scared of performing and public speaking. But this 
was something else. I simply could not come to terms with the idea that I would 
have to stand in front of an entire seminar room full of — ooh — twelve, maybe 
thirteen people, and talk to them for twenty minutes. People who would be 
actively thinking about me and concentrating on me and listening to the words 
coming out of my mouth. 

‘Everyone gets nervous,’ my mum told me, on the phone. ‘It’s nothing. And 
the closer you get to it, the closer it is to being over.’ 

But what did she know? 

I mean, what if I got a nosebleed? What if I couldn’t speak at all? What if I 
pissed myself? There were other doubts too. How do you say Picabia? Should I 
use a French accent for the name of Georges Braque’s painting Nature morte? 

For about five weeks I couldn’t really enjoy anything because this was coming 


up, and I couldn’t do a no-show because it was assessed, as part of course work. 
The thing that I was particularly worried about was the fact that I had to co- 
ordinate reading my words with the presenting of slides. What if I put the slides 
in upside down? What if I spoke about Juan Gris’ Portrait of Picasso while 
actually showing a Picasso? There were a seemingly infinite number of 
nightmare possibilities. 

Fittingly, given the subject of the talk was an art movement that involved 
abandoning perspective, I was losing perspective. 

The day came. Tuesday, 17 March 1997. It looked like so many other drab 
Hull days. But it wasn’t. Looks were deceptive. There was threat in the air. 
Everything — even the furniture in our student house — looked like secret 
weapons in an invisible war against me. Reading Dracula for my Gothic 
Literature module wasn’t helping either. (‘I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I 
fear; I think strange things, which I dare not confess to my own soul.’) 

“You could always pretend to be ill,’ my new girlfriend and future wife 
Andrea said. 

‘No, I can’t. It’s assessed. It’s assessed!’ 

‘Jesus, Matt, calm down. You have turned this into something it’s not.’ 

And then I went to the chemist and bought a pack of Natracalm and 
swallowed as many of the twenty-four tablets as I could manage. (I think about 
sixteen. Two sheets’ worth. They tasted of grass and chalk.) I waited to feel the 
calm that was promised. 

But it didn’t happen. Itching happened. And then a rash happened. 

The rash was all over my neck and hands. Angry red blotches. My skin felt 
not only immensely itchy but also hot. The seminar wasn’t until quarter past 
two. Maybe the rash was a stress response. Maybe I needed something else to 
calm me down. I went to the union bar and had a pint of lager and two vodka 
and limes. I had a cigarette. With ten minutes to go before the presentation was 
due to begin I was in the toilets in the History Department, staring at a swastika 
some idiot had biro’d onto the shining blonde wood of the door. 


My neck was getting worse. I stayed in the toilets. Silently briefing myself in 
the mirror. 

I felt the power of time. The power of it as something unmoving. 

‘Stop,’ I whispered. But time doesn’t stop. Not even when you ask it nicely. 

Then I did it. I did the presentation. I stuttered and sounded frail as an autumn 
leaf in my head and messed up the slides a couple of times and failed to say 


anything at all that I didn’t have written down in front of me in my best 
handwriting. People didn’t giggle at my rash. They just looked deeply, deeply 
uncomfortable. 

But halfway through I became detached from myself. I derealised. The string 
that holds on to that feeling of selfhood, the feeling of being me, was cut, and it 
floated away like a helium balloon. I suppose it was your standard out-of-body 
experience. I was there, not exactly above myself, but above and beside and 
everywhere all at once, watching and hearing myself in a state of such 
heightened self-consciousness I’d actually burst right out of myself altogether. 

It was, I suppose, a panic attack. My first actual proper one, though nowhere 
near the scale of those I’d know later in Ibiza, or back living at home with my 
parents. It should have been a warning sign, but it wasn’t, because I had been 
panicking for a reason. Okay, so it wasn’t much of one, but in my head it was. 
And if you are having a panic attack for a reason — a lion is chasing you, the lift 
door won’t open, you don’t know how to pronounce ‘chiaroscuro’ — then it is not 
really a panic attack, but a logical response to a fearful situation. 

To panic without a reason, that’s madness. To panic with a reason, that’s 
sanity. I was still on the right side of the line. 

Just. 

But it is always hard for us to see the future inside the present, even when it is 
right there in front of us. 


The Big A 


ANXIETY IS THE partner of depression. It accompanies half the cases of 
depression. Sometimes it triggers depression. Sometimes depression triggers 
anxiety. Sometimes they simply co-exist, like a nightmare marriage. Though of 
course it is perfectly possible to have anxiety minus depression, and vice versa. 

Anxiety and depression are an interesting mix. In many ways they are 
opposite experiences, and yet mix them together and you don’t get a happy 
medium. Quite the opposite. Anxiety, which often bubbles up into panic, is a 
nightmare in fast-forward. Anxiety, even more than depression, can be 
exacerbated by the way we live in the twenty-first century. By the things that 
surround us. 

Smartphones. Advertising (I think of a great David Foster Wallace line — ‘It 
did what all ads are supposed to do: create an anxiety relievable by purchase.’) 
Twitter followers. Facebook likes. Instagram. Information overload. 
Unanswered emails. Dating apps. War. The rapid evolution of technology. 
Urban planning. The changing climate. Overcrowded public transport. Articles 
on the ‘post-anti-biotic age’. Photoshopped cover models. Google-induced 
hypochondria. Infinite choice (‘anxiety is the dizziness of freedom’ — Sgren 
Kierkegaard). Online shopping. The should-we-eat-butter? debate. Atomised 
living. All those American TV dramas we should have watched. All those prize- 
winning books we should have read. All those pop stars we haven’t heard of. All 
that lacking we are made to feel. Instant gratification. Constant distraction. Work 
work work. Twenty-four-hour everything. 

Maybe to be truly in tune with the modern world means anxiety is inevitable. 
But here we must again distinguish between anxiety and ‘Anxiety’. For instance, 
I was always an anxious person. As a child I used to worry about death a lot. 
Certainly more than a child should. I also used to climb into my parents’ bed as a 
ten-year-old and tell them I was too scared to go to sleep in case I woke up 
without the ability to see or hear. I used to worry about meeting new people, I’d 
get stomach aches on Sunday nights about Monday mornings, I even cried once 
— when I was fourteen — about the fact that music wasn’t as good as it had been 
when I was little. I was a sensitive child, it’s fair to say. 

But Anxiety proper — generalised anxiety disorder and the related panic 
disorder that I was diagnosed with too — can be (but isn’t always) a desperate 


thing. It can be a full-time occupation of gale-force worry. 
That said, from my personal experience, anxiety — even more than depression 
— is very treatable. 


Slow down 


IF YOU SUFFER from anxiety on its own, or the fast-speed kind of depression that 
comes when it is fused with anxiety, there are things you can do. Some people 
take pills. For some they are a literal lifesaver. But as we’ve seen, finding the 
right pill is a tricky science because, in truth, the science of the brain is itself not 
quite there. 

The tools used to analyse the processes of living human brains — things like 
CAT (computed axial tomography) scans and, later, MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging) scans have only been in existence a few decades. Of course, these 
things are very good at providing pretty, multi-coloured pictures of the brain, 
and telling us which parts of the brain are most active. They can point to things 
like the part of the brain responsible for the pleasurable feeling we get when we 
eat a chocolate bar, or for the distress when we hear a baby cry. Clever stuff. But 
there are weaknesses. 

‘Most parts of the brain do different things at different times,’ says Dr David 
Adam, author of The Man Who Couldn’t Stop. ‘The amygdala, for example, 
plays a role in both sexual arousal and terror — but an MRI scan cannot 
differentiate between passion and panic .. . So what should we think when the 
amygdala lights up on an MRI scan when we are shown a picture of Cameron 
Diaz or Brad Pitt — that we are afraid of them?’ 

So, the tools aren’t perfect. And neuroscience isn’t perfect. 

Some things are known, but more isn’t. Maybe this lack of true understanding 
explains why there is still stigma about mental health. Where there is mystery, 
there will be fear. 

Ultimately, there remains no sure-fire cure. There are pills, but only a liar 
would say they work every time or that they are always an ideal solution. It is 
also rare that they cure someone without additional help. But when it comes to 
the anxiety side at least, there does seem to be one thing that works across the 
board, to a greater or lesser degree. 

Namely: slowing down. Anxiety runs your mind at fast-forward rather than 
normal ‘play’ speed, so addressing that issue of mental ‘pace’ might not be easy. 
But it works. Anxiety takes away all the commas and full stops we need to make 
sense of ourselves. 

Here are some ways to add back that mental punctuation: 


Yoga. I was a yogaphobe, but am now a convert. It’s great, because unlike other 
therapies, it treats the mind and the body as part of the same whole. 


Slow your breathing. Not crazy deep breaths. Just gentle. In for five, out for five. 
It’s hard to stick to, but it is very hard for panic to happen if your breathing is 
relaxed. So many anxiety symptoms — dizziness, pins and needles, tingling — are 
directly related to shallow breathing. 


Meditate. You don’t have to chant. Just sit down for five minutes and try and 
think of a single calming thing. A boat moored in a glittering sea. The face of 
someone you love. Or just focus on your breathing. 


Accept. Don’t fight things, feel them. Tension is about opposition, relaxation is 
about letting go. 


Live in the present. Here is meditation master Amit Ray: ‘If you want to conquer 
the anxiety of life, live in the moment. Live in the breath.’ 


Love. Anais Nin called anxiety ‘love’s greatest killer’. But fortunately, the 
reverse is also true. Love is anxiety’s greatest killer. Love is an outward force. It 
is our road out of our own terrors, because anxiety is an illness that wraps us up 
in our own nightmares. This is not selfishness, even though people read it as 
such. If your leg is on fire, it is not selfish to concentrate on the pain, or the fear 
of the flames. So it is with anxiety. People with mental illnesses aren’t wrapped 
up in themselves because they are intrinsically any more selfish than other 
people. Of course not. They are just feeling things that can’t be ignored. Things 
that point the arrows inward. But having people who love you and who you love 
is such a help. This doesn’t have to be romantic, or even familial love. Forcing 
yourself to see the world through love’s gaze can be healthy. Love is an attitude 
to life. It can save us. 


Peaks and troughs 


AS I HAVE Said, whenever I panicked I wished for a real danger. If you are having 
a panic attack for a reason then it is not really a panic attack, but a logical 
response to a fearful situation. Likewise, whenever I felt that downward 
gearshift towards that heavy and infinite sadness, I wished it had an external 
cause. 

But, as time grew on, I knew something I hadn’t known earlier. I knew that 
down wasn’t the only direction. If you hung in there, if you stuck it out, then 
things got better. They get better and then they get worse and then they get 
better. 

Peaks and troughs, peaks and troughs, as a homeopath had told me, while I 
was living at my parents’ house (the homeopath’s words had worked better than 
her tinctures). 


Parenthesis 


(IT’S A WEIRD thing, depression. Even now, writing this with a good distance of 
fourteen years from my lowest point, I haven’t fully escaped. You get over it, 
but at the same time you never get over it. It comes back in flashes, when you 
are tired or anxious or have been eating the wrong stuff, and catches you off 
guard. I woke up with it a few days ago, in fact. I felt its dark wisps around my 
head, that ominous life-is-fear feeling. But then, after a morning with the best 
five-and six-year-olds in the world, it subsided. It is now an aside. Something to 
put brackets around. Life lesson: the way out is never through yourself.) 


Parties 


FOR TEN YEARS of my life I could not go to a party without being terrified. Yes, 
here was me, who had worked in Ibiza for the largest and wildest weekly party 
in Europe, unable to step into a room full of happy people holding wine glasses 
without having a panic attack. 

Shortly after I became published, and was worried that I would soon be 
dropped, I felt obliged to attend a literary Christmas party. I was sober, as I was 
still petrified of alcohol, and I headed into a room and instantly felt out of my 
depth as famous brainy people (Zadie Smith, David Baddiel, Graham Swift) 
seemed to be everywhere, with their famous brainy faces, totally in their 
element. 

Of course, it is never easy walking into a room full of people. There is that 
awkward moment of hovering around, like a serious lonely molecule, while 
everyone else is in their tight little circles, all laughter and conversation. 

I stood in the middle of the room, looking for someone I knew for reasons 
other than that they were famous, and couldn’t see anyone. I held my glass of 
sparkling mineral water (I was too scared of caffeine and sugar to have anything 
else) and tried to think my discomfort made me a genius. After all, Keats and 
Beethoven and Charlotte Bronté hated parties. But then I realised there were 
probably millions of historical non-geniuses who also hated them too. 

For a couple of seconds, I kind of accidentally locked eyes with Zadie Smith. 
She turned away. She was clearly thinking I was a weirdo. The Queen of 
Literature thinks Iam a weirdo! 

One hundred and ninety-one years before this party, and only a couple of 
miles away, Keats had sat down to write a letter to his friend Richard 
Woodhouse. 

‘When I am in a room with People,’ he wrote, ‘if I ever am free from 
speculating on creations of my own brain, then not myself goes home to myself: 
but the identity of every one in the room begins to press upon me so that I am in 
a very little time annihilated.’ 

As I stood there, and those bubbles of carbon dioxide rose in my glass, I felt a 
kind of annihilation. I began to be not entirely sure I was there at all, and I felt 
floaty. This was it. A relapse. Weeks, maybe months, of depression awaited me. 

Breathe, I told myself. Just breathe. 


I needed Andrea. The air was getting thinner. I was in the zone. I had passed 
the event horizon. It was no good. I was lost in a black hole of my own making. 

I put my glass down on a table and got out of there. I left a coat in the 
cloakroom that could still be there for all I know. I stepped into the London night 
and ran back the short distance to the café where Andrea, my eternal saviour, 
waited for me. 

“‘What’s the matter?’ she asked. ‘I thought you were going to be an hour?’ 

‘T couldn’t. I needed to get out of there.’ 

‘Well, you are out. How do you feel?’ 

I thought about this. How did I feel? Like an idiot, obviously. But also, my 
panic attack had gone. In the old days, my panic attacks didn’t just go. They 
simply morphed into more panic attacks, breaking me down, like an army, until 
depression could come in and colonise my head. But no. I was feeling quite 
normal again. A normal person who was allergic to parties. I had wanted to die 
in the party, but not literally. Really, I had just wanted to escape the room. But I 
at least had walked into the room in the first place. That itself was progress. A 
year later I would be better enough to not only go to the party, but to travel there 
on my own. Sometimes on the rocky, windy path of recovery, what feels like 
failure can be a step forward. 


#reasonstostayalive 


I asked some people online who have experience of depression, anxiety or 
suicidal thoughts, ‘What keeps you going?’ These were their reasons to stay 
alive: @Matineegirl 

Friends, family, acceptance, sharing, knowing the black dog will leave 
eventually. #reasonstostayalive @mannyliz 

Very simply my children. They didn’t ask to be born to a mum who at times 
struggles to keep it together. 


@groznez 
#reasonstostayalive Yoga. Couldn’t be without it. 


@Ginny_Bradwell 
#reasonstostayalive Realising it was ok to be ill and that there were no quick 
fixes. 


@AI|Redboots 
The hole you’d leave is bigger than the pain you suffer by being. 
#reasonstostayalive 


@LeeJamesHatrison 
To spite yourself for those intermittent spiteless days and moments that are HD 
quality wonderful as a result. 


@H3llMHighH33ls 

There are moments and days when the fog lifts. Those times are glorious. 
#reasonstostayalive @simone_mc 

My #reasonstostayalive? The future. The undiscovered country. To find and 
meet other people who appreciate corny Star Trek references. 


@Erastes 
#reasonstostayalive The days start lengthening after December 21. Something to 
cling to in the dark times. 


@PixleTVPi 
My only reason to stay alive is my best friend. #reasonstostayalive 


@paperbookmarks 

because even though I’m in constant pain, I have the most supportive people 
around me, and the best books to read. #reasonstostayalive @ameliasnelling 
#reasonstostayalive I still haven’t seen Iceland where my ashes will be scattered. 


@debecca 
#reasonstostayalive To spite cancer, Bipolar and all the other things trying to kill 
me young. 


@vivatrampv 

The surgeons worked so hard to give me the future that I deserve to have. 
#reasonstostayalive @lillianharpl 

#reasonstostayalive Since the other option isn’t flexible. 


@NickiDaviesbr/>I’m weird, an optimistic depressive! Even when it’s really 
bad I still believe it can be better. #reasonstostayalive @Leilah_Makes 

I’m comforted by maintaining habits. It allows me a little control. 
#reasonstostayalive @Doc_Megz_to_be 

The uncertain future. It may cause anxiety but it is also like a book that is really 
hard to predict. #reasonstostayalive @ilonacatherine 

Not everyone thinks you’re as much of a waste of space as you do when in the 
depths of depression. Trust others. #reasonstostayalive 


@stueygod 
Music. #reasonstostayalive 


@ameliasward 
Sunny mornings. #reasonstostayalive 


@DolinaMunro 
Bacon rolls. #reasonstostayalive 


@mirandafay 
Fresh air. The uncompromising love of a good dog. #reasonstostayalive 


@jeebreslin 

Because inside there is a golden you who loves you and wants you to win and 
prevail and be happy. #reasonstostayalive @ylovesgok 

The realisation I can get help. #reasonstostayalive 


@wilsonxox 

Sunsets. And that particularly unspecific musical genre with access to your 
spine. #reasonstostayalive 

@MagsTheObscure 

The brother I look after. This is one of the main reasons I remain a carer. He’s 
my lighthouse in the storm. #reasonstostayalive @jaras76 

Possibilities. Overcoming the next challenge. Soccer. #reasonstostayalive 


@HHDreamWolf 

Suicide may lead to my friends and family becoming depressed, I would never 
wish depression on anyone. #reasonstostayalive @DebWonda 

Everything passes — joy follows pain, warmth melts the ice. #reasonstostayalive 


@legallyogi 
My last depression was a severe post-natal. It was an awful time. My 
#reasonstostayalive were my family and knowing it would pass. 


@ayaanidilsays 

#reasonstostayalive I’d say best friends. The Great Perhaps. 

@lordof1 

The dogs always need walking in the morning. #reasonstostayalive 
@UTBookblog 

The experience to know that tomorrow will be a better day. My family, 
boyfriend, friends . . . and my TBR pile! #reasonstostayalive 
@GoodWithoutGods 


#reasonstostayalive Because 7 x 10449 atoms won’t arrange themselves this way 
ever again. It’s a one-off privilege. 


@Book_Geek_Says 

The support of my mum and now my boyfriend who got together with me at one 
of my lowest points three years ago. #reasonstostayalive @Teens22 
#reasonstostayalive Love is the best reason to stay alive. Self-love, love for other 
people, love of life and noticing the good. #reasonstostayalive @ZODIDOG 
#reasonstostayalive Some days it’s as simple as blue skies & sunshine. Or the 
cuteness and reward from my pet chinchilla. 


@Halftongue 
Sometimes my #reasonstostayalive amount to no more than ‘people would be 


sad and angry if I didn’t.’ Those are bad days. 


@tara818 
#reasonstostayalive I had to feed my baby. I had crippling anxiety & post-natal 
depression, only here because of having to nurse him. 


@BeverlyBambury 

Don’t always know why I kept moving, but it never — for long — felt like an 
option not to. Grim determination? #reasonstostayalive 

@wolri 

#reasonstostayalive Simple things — husband’s support, not crowding me when 
I’m having a bad time, mainly my family & my little dog. 


@Lyssa_1234 

Not wanting to hurt parents/sibling/partner. No matter how low I get, I know that 
these people would miss me. #reasonstostayalive @BlondeBookGirl 

My #reasonstostayalive include ‘picturing my cat’s little face if I wasn’t here’, 
‘my munm/sister’ and ‘all the books I really want to read.’ 


@gourenina 

Knowing my depression has never lasted forever, and there has always been a 
way out. #reasonstostayalive @Despard 

It’s been better before and it will be again. #reasonstostayalive 


Things that make me WOTFSe coffee. 


Lack of sleep. 

The dark. 

The cold. 

September. 

October. 

Mid-afternoons. 

Tight muscles. 

The pace of contemporary existence. 
Bad posture. 

Being away from the people I love. 
Sitting for too long. 

Advertising. 

Feeling ignored. 

Waking up at three in the morning. 
TV. 


Bananas (I am not sure about this one, it is probably a coincidence). 
Alcohol. 

Facebook (sometimes). 

Twitter (sometimes). 

Deadlines. 

Editing. 

Difficult decisions (you know, which socks to wear). 

Getting physically ill. 

Thinking I am feeling depressed (the most vicious of circles). 
Not drinking enough water. 

Checking my Amazon ranking. 

Checking other writers’ Amazon rankings. 

Walking into a social function on my own. 

Train travel. 

Hotel rooms. 

Being alone. 


Things that (sometimes) make me better 


Mindfulness. 
Running. 
Yoga. 
Summer. 
Sleep. 
Slow breathing. 
Being around people I love. 
Reading Emily Dickinson poems. 
Reading some of Graham Greene’s The Power and the Glory. 
Writing. 
Eating well. 
Long baths/showers. 
Eighties movies. 
Listening to music. 


Facebook (sometimes). 

Twitter (sometimes). 

Going for a long walk. 

‘Noble deeds and hot baths’ (Dodie Smith). 

Making burritos. 

Light skies and walls. 

Reading Keats’ letters. (‘Do you not see how necessary a world of pains and 
troubles is to school an intelligence and make it a soul?’) The bank of bad 
days. 

Large rooms. 

Doing something selfless. 

The smell of bread. 

Wearing clean clothes (come on, I’m a writer, this is rarer than you’d think). 

Thinking I have things that work for me. 

Knowing that other things work for other people. 

Absorbing myself into something. 

Knowing that someone else may read these words and that, just maybe, the pain 
I felt wasn’t for nothing. 


Being 


‘Put your ear down next to your soul and listen hard.’ 
—Anne Sexton 


In praise of thin skins 


THAVE A thin skin. 

I think this is part and parcel of depression and anxiety, or — to be precise — 
being a person quite likely to get depression and anxiety. I also think that I will 
never fully get over my breakdown fourteen years ago. If the stone falls hard 
enough the ripples last a lifetime. 

I have gone from never feeling happy to feeling happy — or at last somewhere 
in the ballpark — most of the time. So I am lucky. But I have blips. Either blips 
when I am genuinely depressed/anxious or blips caused by me fighting the onset 
of depression/anxiety by doing something stupid (getting excessively drunk and 
coming home at five in the morning after losing my wallet and having to plead 
with taxi drivers to take me home). But generally, day to day, I don’t fight it. I 
accept things more. This is who I am. And besides, fighting it actually makes it 
worse. The trick is to befriend depression and anxiety. To be thankful for them, 
because then you can deal with them a whole lot better. And the way I have 
befriended them is by thanking them for my thin skin. 

Sure, without a thin skin I would have never known those terrible days of 
nothingness. Those days of either panic, or intense, bone-scorching lethargy. The 
days of self-hate, or drowning under invisible waves. I sometimes felt, in my 
self-pity, too fragile for a world of speed and right angles and noise. (I love 
Jonathan Rottenberg’s evolutionary theory of depression, that it is to do with 
being unable to adapt to the present: ‘An ancient mood system has collided with 
a highly novel operating environment created by a remarkable species.’) 

But would I go along to a magical mind spa and ask for a skin-thickening 
treatment? Probably not. You need to feel life’s terror to feel its wonder. 

And I feel it today, actually, right now, on what could seem like quite a grey, 
overcast afternoon. I feel the sheer unfathomable marvel that is this strange life 
we have, here on earth, the seven billion of us, clustered in our towns and cities 
on this pale blue dot of a planet, spending our allotted 30,000 days as best we 
can, in glorious insignificance. 

I like to feel the force of that miracle. I like to burrow deep into this life, and 
explore it through the magic of words and the magic of human beings (and the 
magic of peanut butter sandwiches). And I am glad to feel every tumultuous 
second of it, and glad for the fact that when I walk into the vast room with all the 


Tintorettos in it in the National Gallery my skin literally tingles, and my heart 
palpitates, and I am glad for the synesthesia that means when I read Emily 
Dickinson or Mark Twain my mind feels actual warmth from those old 
American words. 

Feeling. 

That is what it is about. 

People place so much value on thought, but feeling is as essential. I want to 
read books that make me laugh and cry and fear and hope and punch the air in 
triumph. I want a book to hug me or grab me by the scruff of my neck. I don’t 
even mind if it punches me in the gut. Because we are here to feel. 

I want life. 

I want to read it and write it and feel it and live it. 

I want, for as much of the time as possible in this blink-of-an-eye existence 
we have, to feel all that can be felt. 

I hate depression. I am scared of it. Terrified, in fact. But at the same time, it 
has made me who I am. And if — for me — it is the price of feeling life, it’s a 
price always worth paying. 

I am satisfied just to be. 


How to be a bit happier than Schopenhauer 


FOR ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER, the depressive’s favourite philosopher (and one who 
influenced Nietzsche, Freud and Einstein in varying but significant ways), life 
was the pursuit of futile purposes. ‘We blow out a soap-bubble as long and as 
large as possible, although with the perfect certainty that it will burst.’ In this 
view, happiness is impossible, because of all these goals. Goals are the source of 
misery. An unattained goal causes pain, but actually achieving it brings only a 
brief satisfaction. 

In fact, if you really think about it, a life made of goals is going to be 
disappointing. Yes, it might propel you forward, keep you turning the pages of 
your own existence, but ultimately it will leave you empty. Because even if you 
achieve your goals, what then? You may have gained the thing you lacked, but 
with it, what then? You either set another goal, stress about how you keep the 
thing you attained, or you think — along with the millions of people having mid- 
(or early-or late-) life crises right now — This is everything I wanted, so why am I 
not happy? 

So what was Schopenhauer’s answer? Well, if wanting things was the 
problem, the answer had to be in giving things up. In his language, the cause of 
suffering is intensity of will. 

Schopenhauer believed that by seeing the bigger picture, by viewing humanity 
as a whole and its suffering as a whole, a person would turn away from life and 
deny their instincts. In other words, the Schopenhauer plan involves no sex, very 
little money, fasting and a fair bit of self-torture. 

Only that way — by totally denying human will — can we see the truth that in 
front of us ‘there is certainly only nothingness’. 

Bleak, huh? 

Well, yes. Although Schopenhauer didn’t recommend suicide, he 
recommended a kind of living suicide, in which anything pleasurable had to be 
scomed. 

But Schopenhauer was a major hypocrite. He talked the talk but couldn’t walk 
the walk. As Bertrand Russell explained in his History of Western Philosophy: 


He habitually dined well, at a good restaurant, he had many trivial love-affairs, which were sensual 


but not passionate; he was exceedingly quarrelsome and unusually avaricious. On one occasion he 
was annoyed by an elderly seamstress who was talking to a friend outside the door of his apartment. 
He threw her downstairs, causing her permanent injury . . . It is hard to find in his life any virtue 
except kindness to animals . . . In all other respects he was completely selfish. 


Schopenhauer — the ultimate pessimist — actually illustrates how unhappiness 
works. His work set out anti-goal goals that he couldn’t meet. 

Now, I don’t endorse throwing old women down stairs, but I kind of warm to 
Schopenhauer. I think he recognised the problem — will, or desire of ego or goal- 
orientated drive or whichever historical term you want to use — but in life he 
grappled around in the dark (often literally, given his messy love-life). 

So, what’s the way out? How do you stop the endless wanting and worrying? 
How do you get off the treadmill? How do you stop time? How do we stop 
exhausting ourselves worrying about the future? 


The best answers — the answers that have been written and recorded for 
thousands of years — always seem to resolve around acceptance. Schopenhauer 
himself was greatly influenced by ancient Eastern philosophy. ‘The truth has 
been recognised by the sages of India,’ he said. Indeed, his belief that abstinence 
from worldly pleasures is the answer to life, is something he shares with a lot of 
Buddhist thinkers. 

But Buddhist thought is not as negative or miserable as Schopenhauer. With 
Schopenhauer all this asceticism is a bit self-punishing, a bit full of self-loathing, 
which is unhealthy and counter-productive. 

A world full of people hating themselves is not a happy world. 

Buddhism does not seem to be about self-punishment. 

A key Buddhist symbol is that of the lotus flower. The lotus flower grows in 
mud at the bottom of a pool, but rises above the murky water and blooms in the 
clear air, pure and beautiful, before eventually dying. This metaphor for spiritual 
enlightenment also works as a metaphor for hope and change. The mud you 
could see as depression or anxiety. The flowers in the clear air, the self we know 
we can be, unclogged by despair. 


Indeed, a lot of the Dhammapada, chief among the Buddhist sacred texts 
(being a record of the Gautama Buddha’s teaching), reads like an early self-help 
book. 

‘No one saves us but ourselves, no one can and no one may.’ In Buddhism, 


salvation is something that is not external. To be happy, and at peace, Buddhism 
says, we have to be vigilant, aware of ourselves. Mindful. ‘As rain breaks 
through an ill-thatched house, passion in the sense of suffering will break 
through an unreflecting mind.’ 

In a world with far more shiny distractions than the world of Himalayan India 
way over two thousand years ago, our metaphorical mental houses may be 
harder to thatch than ever before. 

Our minds now are less like thatched houses and a bit like computers. Yes, I 
could in theory get on my computer, open a Word document and just write, but I 
would probably check Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, the Guardian website. I 
might — if I am going through a neurotic patch — do a quick ego search, or check 
out any new Goodreads or Amazon reviews of my books or go on Google and 
type in a list of real or imaginary ailments to see which terminal disease I am 
currently suffering from. 

Even Buddha himself would struggle these days, though the lack of Wi-Fi in 
the Himalayan foothills would be a blessing if you wanted to meditate for forty- 
nine days under a tree. 

One thing I do understand, though, is that more is not better. I am not a 
Buddhist. I find all strict and certain guidelines too scary. Life is beautiful in its 
ambiguity. But I like the idea of being alert to ourselves, of connecting to the 
universal rather than living life on a see-saw of hope and fear. 

For me personally, happiness isn’t about abandoning the world of stuff, but in 
appreciating it for what it is. We cannot save ourselves from suffering by buying 
an iPhone. That doesn’t mean we shouldn’t buy one, it just means we should 
know such things are not ends in themselves. 

And compassion. 

That’s another thing I like about Buddhism. 

The idea that kindness makes us happier than selfishness. That kindness is a 
shredding of the self or, in Schopenhauer-speak, will — that releases us from the 
suffering that is our desires and wants. 

To be selfless, while being mindful, seems to be a good solution, when the self 
intensifies and causes us to suffer. 

Being good feels good because it makes us remember that we are not the only 
person that matters in this world. We all matter because we are all alive. And so 
kindness is an active way in which we can see and feel the bigger picture. We 
are ultimately all the same thing. We are life. We are consciousness. And so by 
feeling part of humanity, rather than an isolated unit, we feel better. We might 
physically perish, like a cell in a body might perish, but the body of life 
continues. And so, in the sense that life is a shared experience, we continue. 


Self-help 


How to stop time: kiss. 

How to travel in time: read. 
How to escape time: music. 
How to feel time: write. 
How to release time: breathe. 


Thoughts on time 


TIME TROUBLES US. 

It is because of time that we grow old, and because of time we die. These are 
wotrying things. As Aristotle put it, ‘time crumbles things’. And we are scared 
of our own crumbling, and the crumbling of others. 

We feel an urgency to get on because time is short. To ‘just do it’, as Nike 
said. But is doing the answer? Or does doing actually speed up time? Wouldn’t it 
be better just to be, even if less sporty footwear ends up being sold? 

Time does go at different speeds. As I’ve said, the few months in 1999 and 
2000 when I was deeply ill felt like years. Decades, even. Pain lengthens time. 
But that is only because pain forces us to be aware of it. 

Being aware of other things also helps lengthen time. This is all meditation is. 
Awareness of ourselves in the ‘amber’ of the moment, to use Kurt Vonnegut’s 
term. It sounds easy, but how much of our lives are we actually living in the 
present? How much instead are we either excited or worrying about the future, 
or regretting or mourning the past? Our response to all this worry about time is 
to try and achieve things before it is too late. Gain money, improve our status, 
marry, have children, get a promotion, gain more money, on and on for ever. Or 
rather, not for ever. If it were for ever, we wouldn’t be having this discussion. 
But we kind of know that turning life into a desperate race for more stuff is only 
going to shorten it. Not in years, not in terms of actual time, but in terms of how 
time feels. Imagine all the time we had was bottled up, like wine, and handed 
over to us. How would we make that bottle last? By sipping slowly, appreciating 
the taste, or by gulping? 


Formentera 


TO THE SOUTH of Ibiza there is the small island of Formentera, fourth-largest of 
the Balearic Islands. Me and Andrea used to go there sometimes on rare days 
off. It was a place of white beaches and pristine water — the cleanest in the whole 
Mediterranean due to UNESCO-protected seagrasses under the water. It was the 
calming yin to Ibiza’s frenetic yang. Its small population of two thousand people 
is dotted liberally with artists, hippies and yoga instructors (if you look at it on 
the map you’ll see it is shaped like an upside down V, as if the island is 
continually in downward dog pose). It retained a sixties vibe. Bob Dylan spent 
some time living in the lighthouse at Cap de Barbaria, on the island’s 
southernmost tip. Formentera was also where Joni Mitchell wrote the album 
Blue. 

I used to have a phobia about the Balearics. Couldn’t face the idea of them, as 
it was on Ibiza that I began to fall apart. But now when I think of a calm place, I 
think of here. I picture its landscape of juniper and almond trees. I think of that 
sea as well. So bright and blue and clear. 

I think of the names of its small villages, and harbour, and beaches. Es Pujol, 
El Pilar de la Mola, La Savina, Cap de Barbaria, Playa Illetes. And, most 
evocative of all, the name of the island itself. 

When I feel the tension rising I sometimes close my eyes and think of it, the 
word rolling like soft pristine saltwater against sand. Formentera, Formentera, 
Formentera .. . 


Images On a screen 


IN THE OLD days, before the breakdown, I used to deal with worry by distracting 
myself. By going out to clubs, by drinking heavily, by spending summers in 
Ibiza, by wanting the spiciest food, the brashest movies, the edgiest novels, the 
loudest music, the latest nights. I was scared of the quiet. I was scared, I 
suppose, of having to slow down and soften the volume. Scared of having 
nothing but my own mind to listen to. 

But after I became ill, all of this was suddenly out of bounds. I once switched 
on the radio and heard pounding house music and it gave me a panic attack. If I 
ate a jalfrezi, I would lie in bed that night hallucinating and palpitating. People 
talk about using alcohol and drugs to self-medicate, and I would have loved to 
dull my senses. I would have taken crack if I thought it would help me ignore the 
hurricane in my head. But from the age of twenty-four to thirty-two I didn’t have 
so much as a single glass of wine. Not because I was strong (as my teetotal 
future mother-in-law always thought I was) but because I was petrified of 
anything that would alter my mind. I went five of those years refusing even to 
take an ibuprofen. Not because I had been drunk off my head when I first 
became ill — the day I became ill I hadn’t had so much as a sip of alcohol and 
was in a (comparatively) healthy patch. I suppose it was just that feeling that my 
damaged mind lay precariously in the balance, like the bus hanging off the edge 
of a cliff in The Italian Job, and that the gold/alcohol might look tempting but to 
reach for it would be to send yourself falling towards a fatal end. 

So, this was the problem. Just when I really needed to take my mind off 
something, I couldn’t. My fear was such that even after smelling a glass of 
Andrea’s red wine I would imagine those inhaled molecules entering my brain 
and tilting it further away from me. 

But this was a good thing. It meant I had to focus on my mind. Like in an old 
horror movie, I was pulling back the curtain and seeing the monster. 

Years later, I would read books on mindfulness and meditation, and realise 
that the key to happiness — or that even more desired thing, calmness — lies not in 
always thinking happy thoughts. No. That is impossible. No mind on earth with 
any kind of intelligence could spend a lifetime enjoying only happy thoughts. 
The key is in accepting your thoughts, all of them, even the bad ones. Accept 
thoughts, but don’t become them. 


Understand, for instance, that having a sad thought, even having a continual 
succession of sad thoughts, is not the same as being a sad person. You can walk 
through a storm and feel the wind but you know you are not the wind. 

That is how we must be with our minds. We must allow ourselves to feel their 
gales and downpours, but all the time knowing this is just necessary weather. 

When I sink deep, now, and I still do from time to time, I try and understand 
that there is another, bigger and stronger part of me that is not sinking. It stands 
unwavering. It is, I suppose, the part that would have been once called my soul. 

We don’t have to call it that, if we think it has too many connotations. We can 
call it simply a self. Let’s just understand this. If we are tired or hungry or 
hungover, we are likely to be in a bad mood. That bad mood is therefore not 
really us. To believe in the things we feel at that point is wrong, because those 
feelings would disappear with food or sleep. 

But when I was at my lowest points I touched something solid, something 
hard and strong at the core of me. Something imperishable, immune to the 
changeability of thought. The self that is not only I but also we. The self that 
connects me to you, and human to human. The hard, unbreakable force of 
survival. Of life. Of the 150,000 generations of us that have gone before, and of 
those yet to be born. Our human essence. Just as the ground below New York 
and, say, Lagos, becomes identical if you go down far enough beneath the 
earth’s surface, so every human inhabitant on this freak wonder of a planet 
shares the same core. 

I am you and you are me. We are alone, but not alone. We are trapped by 
time, but also infinite. Made of flesh, but also stars. 


Smallness 


I WENT BACK to visit my parents in Newark about a month ago. They don’t live in 
the same house, but the street they are on is parallel to the street where we used 
to live. It is a five-minute walk. 

The corner shop is still there. I walked there on my own and bought a 
newspaper and could happily wait for the shopkeeper to give me my change. The 
houses I passed were the same orange brick houses. Nothing much had changed. 
Nothing makes you feel smaller, more trivial, than such a vast transformation 
inside your own mind while the world carries on, oblivious. Yet nothing is more 
freeing. To accept your smallness in the world. 


How to live (forty pieces of advice I feel to 
be helpful but which I don’t always follow) 


1. 
2: 
3. 
4. 


2 
6. 


o 
8. 


11. 


12; 
13. 
14. 


1; 
16. 


L7 


Appreciate happiness when it is there. 

Sip, don’t gulp. 

Be gentle with yourself. Work less. Sleep more. 

There is absolutely nothing in the past that you can change. That’s basic 
physics. 

Beware of Tuesdays. And Octobers. 


Kurt Vonnegut was right. ‘Reading and writing are the most nourishing 
forms of meditation anyone has so far found.’ 


Listen more than you talk. 


Don’t feel guilty about being idle. More harm is probably done to the world 
through work than idleness. But perfect your idleness. Make it mindful. 


. Be aware that you are breathing. 
10. 


Wherever you are, at any moment, try and find something beautiful. A face, 
a line out of a poem, the clouds out of a window, some graffiti, a wind farm. 
Beauty cleans the mind. 


Hate is a pointless emotion to have inside you. It is like eating a scorpion to 
punish it for stinging you. 

Go for arun. Then do some yoga. 

Shower before noon. 


Look at the sky. Remind yourself of the cosmos. Seek vastness at every 
opportunity, in order to see the smallness of yourself. 


Be kind. 


Understand that thoughts are thoughts. If they are unreasonable, reason with 
them, even if you have no reason left. You are the observer of your mind, 
not its victim. 

Do not watch TV aimlessly. Do not go on social media aimlessly. Always 
be aware of what you are doing, and why you are doing it. Don’t value TV 
less. Value it more. Then you will watch it less. Unchecked distractions will 


lead you to distraction. 


18. Sit down. Lie down. Be still. Do nothing. Observe. Listen to your mind. Let 
it do what it does without judging it. Let it go, like the Snow Queen in 
Frozen. 


19. Don’t worry about things that probably won’t happen. 
20. Look at trees. Be near trees. Plant trees. (Trees are great.) 


21. Listen to that yoga instructor on YouTube, and ‘walk as if you are kissing 
the Earth with your feet’. 


22. Live. Love. Let go. The three Ls. 


23. Alcohol maths. Wine multiplies itself by itself. The more you have, the 
more you are likely to have. And if it’s hard to stop at one glass, it will be 
impossible at three. Addition is multiplication. 


24. Beware of the gap. The gap between where you are and where you want to 
be. Simply thinking of the gap widens it. And you end up falling through. 


25. Read a book without thinking about finishing it. Just read it. Enjoy every 
word, sentence, and paragraph. Don’t wish for it to end, or for it to never 
end. 


26. No drug in the universe will make you feel better, at the deepest level, than 
being kind to other people. 


27. Listen to what Hamlet — literature’s most famous depressive — told 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. ‘There is nothing either good or bad, but 
thinking makes it so.’ 

28. If someone loves you, let them. Believe in that love. Live for them, even 
when you feel there is no point. 

29. You don’t need the world to understand you. It’s fine. Some people will 
never really understand things they haven’t experienced. Some will. Be 
grateful. 

30. Jules Verne wrote of the ‘Living Infinite’. This is the world of love and 
emotion that is like a ‘sea’. If we can submerge ourselves in it, we find 
infinity in ourselves, and the space we need to survive. 

31. Three in the morning is never the time to try and sort out your life. 


32. Remember that there is nothing weird about you. You are just a human, and 
everything you do and feel is a natural thing, because we are natural 
animals. You are nature. You are a hominid ape. You are in the world and 
the world is in you. Everything connects. 


33. Don’t believe in good or bad, or winning and losing, or victory and defeat, 


34. 


DO: 
36. 


ar. 
Gren 


39. 


40. 


or up and down. At your lowest and at your highest, whether you are happy 
or despairing or calm or angry, there is a kernel of you that stays the same. 
That is the you that matters. 


Don’t worry about the time you lose to despair. The time you will have 
afterwards has just doubled its value. 

Be transparent to yourself. Make a greenhouse for your mind. Observe. 
Read Emily Dickinson. Read Graham Greene. Read Italo Calvino. Read 
Maya Angelou. Read anything you want. Just read. Books are possibilities. 
They are escape routes. They give you options when you have none. Each 
one can be a home for an uprooted mind. 

If the sun is shining, and you can be outside, be outside. 

Remember that the key thing about life on earth is change. Cars rust. Paper 
yellows. Technology dates. Caterpillars become butterflies. Nights morph 
into days. Depression lifts. 

Just when you feel you have no time to relax, know that this is the moment 
you most need to make time to relax. 

Be brave. Be strong. Breathe, and keep going. You will thank yourself later. 


Things I have enjoyed since the time I 
thought I would never enjoy anything again 


SUNRISES, SUNSETS, THE thousand suns and worlds that aren’t ours but shine in the 
night sky. Books. Cold beer. Fresh air. Dogs. Horses. Yellowing paperbacks. 
Skin against skin at one in the morning. Long, deep, meaningful kisses. Short, 

shallow, polite kisses. (All kisses.) Cold swimming pools. Oceans. Seas. Rivers. 

Lakes. Fjords. Ponds. Puddles. Roaring fires. Pub meals. Sitting outside and 
eating olives. The lights fading in the cinema, with a bucket of warm popcorn in 
your lap. Music. Love. Unabashed emotion. Rock pools. Swimming pools. 
Peanut butter sandwiches. The scent of pine on a warm evening in Italy. 
Drinking water after a long run. Getting the all-clear after a health scare. Getting 
the phone call. Will Ferrell in Elf. Talking to the person who knows me best. 
Pigeon pose. Picnics. Boat rides. Watching my son being born. Catching my 
daughter in the water during her first three seconds. Reading The Tiger Who 
Came to Tea, and doing the tiger’s voice. Talking politics with my parents. 
Roman Holiday (and a Roman holiday). Talking Heads. Talking online about 
depression for the first time, and getting a good response. Kanye West’s first 
album (I know, I know). Country music (country music!). The Beach Boys. 
Watching old soul singers on YouTube. Lists. Sitting on a bench in the park on a 
sunny day. Meeting writers I love. Foreign roads. Rum cocktails. Jumping up 
and down (they’re publishing my book, they’re publishing my book, Jesus 
Christ, they’re publishing my book). Watching every Hitchcock movie. Cities 
twinkling at night as you drive past them, as if they are fallen constellations of 
stars. Laughing. Yes. Laughing so hard it hurts. Laughing as you bend forward 
and as your abdomen actually starts to hurt from so much pleasure, so much 
release, and then as you sit back and audibly groan and inhale deeply, staring at 
the person next to you, mopping up the joy. Reading a new Geoff Dyer book. 
Reading an old Graham Greene book. Running down hills. Christmas trees. 
Painting the walls of a new house. White wine. Dancing at three in the morning. 
Vanilla fudge. Wasabi peas. My children’s terrible jokes. Watching geese and 
goslings on the river. Reaching an age — thirty-five, thirty-six, thirty-seven, 
thirty-eight, thirty-nine — I never thought I’d reach. Talking to friends. Talking to 
strangers. Talking to you. Writing this book. 


Thank you. 


Further Reading 


Bad Pharma: How medicine is broken, and how we can fix it, Ben Goldacre 
(Fourth Estate, 2012) An eye-opening look at the pharmaceutical industry and 
the vested interests at play. 


Darkness Visible: A Memoir of Madness, William Styron (Vintage, 2001) This 
classic memoir from 1989, which references Paradise Lost in the title, is 
beautifully written and — given the author’s experience on the sleeping pill 
Halcion — serves as a reminder of the dangers of taking the wrong medication. 


The Depths: The Evolutionary Origins of the Depression Epidemic, Jonathan 
Rottenberg (Basic Books, 2014) The best look at depression from an 
evolutionary perspective that I’ve come across. 


Madness and Civilzation, Michel Foucault (Routledge Classics, 2006) 
A controversial, eccentric work, more interested in society than the mind, but 
still a thought-provoking read. 


The Man Who Couldn’t Stop: OCD and the true story of a life lost in thought, Dr 
David Adam (Picador, 2014) A brilliant and at times highly personal study of 
OCD, full of insights into the mind. 


Making Friends with Anxiety: A warm, supportive little book to ease worry and 
panic, Sarah Rayner (CreateSpace, 2014) Simple, lucid advice on how to accept 
your anxiety. 


Mindfulness: A practical guide to finding peace in a frantic world, Professor 
Mark Williams and Dr Danny Penman (Piatkus, 2011) Mindfulness has its fair 
share of sceptics, but as a way of adding punctuation into the breathless sentence 
of your life, I find it can be very useful. This is a solid guide. 


The Noonday Demon: An anatomy of depression, Andrew Solomon (Chatto & 
Windus, 2001) An astonishing (occasionally terrifying) account of Solomon’s 
experience of depression. It is particularly good on diagnosis and treatment. 


Sane New World: Taming the Mind, Ruby Wax (Hodder, 2014) 
A clear and instructive book, with a strong emphasis on mindfulness as a way 
through and as funny as you’d expect from Ruby Wax. 


Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: The Acclaimed Guide to Stress, Stress-Related 
Diseases, and Coping, Dr Robert M. Sapolsky (Henry Holt, 2004) A very 
interesting take on stress, and how it builds up, and the physical body. 


A note, and some acknowledgements 


Willie Nelson once said that sometimes you have to either write a song or you 
kick your foot through a window. The third option, I suppose, is that you write a 
book. 

And I have felt the need to write this book for a long time. But I have also 
been worried about writing it because it is obviously quite personal and I 
worried that writing it would make me relive some of those bad times. So for a 
long time I have been writing about it indirectly, in fiction. 

Two years ago I wrote a book called The Humans. It was in that novel, more 
than in any of my others, in which I addressed my own breakdown. The story 
was technically traditional science fiction — an alien arrives on Earth in human 
form and slowly changes his view of humanity — but I was really writing about 
the alienation of depression and how you get over that and how you can end up 
loving the world again. 


In a note in the end of that book, the equivalent of right here, I publically 
‘came out’ and talked very briefly of my own experience of panic disorder and 
depression. Just that little bit of openness met with a warm response, and I 
realised I’d been worrying over nothing. Rather than make me feel like a weirdo, 
being open had made me realise how many people suffer similar experiences at 
some time or other. Just as none of us are 100% physically healthy no one is 
100% mentally healthy. We are all on a scale. 

I then had the confidence to write a bit more about my experience online. But 
I still didn’t know if I would ever write this book. The person who told me to 
was the great Cathy Rentzenbrink. Cathy is one of the most dynamic and, 
frankly, brilliant advocates of books, championing their cause and — in this case 
— causing them to exist. She was the person, who, over some Wasabi-flavoured 
popcorn at a branch of Itsu, told me to write a book about depression. So, here it 
is, Cathy. Hope you like it. 

This book would not have been this book without an editor. (The main 
advantage of books over life is that they can be redrafted and redrafted, whereas 
life, alas, is always a first draft.) It is the obligatory thing to acknowledge your 
editor in the acknowledgements but even if it wasn’t, ethics and logic would 


demand I mention Francis Bickmore’s role in shaping this book. There are 
numerous suggestions he made that helped me work out how to write it. Mainly 
though, I was grateful to have an editor who would be fine with the genre- 
straddling nature of this book, who wouldn’t ask, ‘is it a memoir or a self-help 
book or an overview?’ And who would be fine about it being a bit of all those 
things. 

And for me, this makes Canongate the perfect publishers. I feel like I can do 
something different and, if they like it, they’ll go with it. So I’m blessed to be 
with them. They turned my career around, and I am thankful to the legendary 
Jamie Byng and everyone who works there (Jenny Todd, Andrea Joyce, Katie 
Moffat, Jaz Lacey-Campbell, Anna Frame, Vicki Rutherford, Sian Gibson, Jo 
Dingley and the whole gang) for taking that chance on me and getting behind my 
stuff the way they have. 

Okay, this spirit of stifling gushiness must continue, while I thank Clare 
Conville, my agent, who totally got the book and reassured me when I was still 
very nervous about it. She is a formidable person to have on your side, and was 
vital in helping steer Reasons to Stay Alive on the right course. 


Also thanks to everyone who has helped and supported me and my writing in 
various ways over the years. Tanya Seghatchian, Jeanette Winterson, Stephen 
Fry, SJ Watson, Joanne Harris, Julia Kingsford, Natalie Doherty, Annie Eaton, 
Amanda Craig, Caradoc King, Amanda Ross, and many, many more. Also 
thanks to all those booksellers that I have met and who have gone the extra mile. 
An obvious mention here for Leilah Skelton, from Waterstones Doncaster, who 
made jars of peanut butter and special badges in honour of The Humans. Also to 
everyone on Facebook and Twitter who has helped spread the word, especially 
those tweeters who contributed to the #reasonstostayalive chapter. 

I’ve always had an open and loving family and I thank them for helping me 
stay afloat, but also for being totally okay about me writing this book. So infinite 
thanks and love as always to Mum, Dad and Phoebe, as well as Freda, Albert, 
David and Katherine too. Thank you for being my net. I love all of you. 
