Case Studies 
in Abnormal 
Psychology 

Ninth Edition 

Thomas F. Oltmanns 

Washington University in St. Louis 

Michele T. Martin 

Wesleyan College 

John M. Neale 

State University of New York at Stony Brook 

Gerald C. Davison 

University of Southern California 



WILEY 

John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


VICE PRESIDENT & EXECUTIVE PUBLISHER 
EXECUTIVE EDITOR 
ASSOCIATE EDITOR 
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT 
MARKETING MANAGER 
SENIOR PRODUCTION MANAGER 
ASSOCIATE PRODUCTION MANAGER 
ASSISTANT PRODUCTION EDITOR 
COVER DESIGNER 
COVER PHOTO CREDIT 


Jay O’Callaghan 
Christopher Johnson 
Eileen McKeever 
Maura Gilligan 
Margaret Barrett 
Janis Soo 
Joyce Poh 
Yee Lyn Song 
Seng Ping Ngieng 

YOSHIKAZU FUJII/a.collectionRF / 
Getty Images, Inc. 


This book was set in 10/12 Times Roman by MPS Limited, a Macmillan Company, Chennai, India, 
and printed and bound by Courier Westford. The cover was printed by Courier Westford. 


This book is printed on acid free paper. © 


Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding 
for more than 200 years, helping people around the world meet their needs and fulfill their 
aspirations. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to the 
communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship 
Initiative, a global effort to address the environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we 
face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper specifications 
and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and 
charitable support. For more information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship. 

Copyright © 2012, 2009, 2007, 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted 
under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written 
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, website www. 
copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions 
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Ill River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201)748-6011, 
fax (201)748-6008, website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions. 

Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, 
for use in their courses during the next academic year. These copies are licensed and may not 
be sold or transferred to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the 
evaluation copy to Wiley. Return instructions and a free of charge return mailing label are available 
at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. If you have chosen to adopt this textbook for use in your course, 
please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the United States, please 
contact your local sales representative. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Case studies in abnormal psychology / Thomas F. Oltmanns. . . [et al.]. — 9th ed. 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 978-1-118-08619-3 (pbk.) 

1. Psychology, Pathological—Case studies. 2. Psychiatry—Case studies. I. Oltmanns, 


Thomas F. 
RC465.047 2012 
616.89—dc23 


2011039949 


Printed in the United States of America 
10 987654321 


“To Presley, Riley, and Kinley” 
—TFO 

“To Matt, Caroline, Grace, and Thomas” 
—MTM 

“To Gail and Sean ” 

—JMN 

“To Kathleen, Eve, and Asher” 
—GCD 




PREFACE 


Most textbooks on abnormal psychology include short descriptions of actual 
clinical cases. However, those presentations are necessarily brief and too frag¬ 
mented for students to gain a clear understanding of the unique complexities of 
a person’s troubled life. They cannot describe the client’s developmental his¬ 
tory, the manner in which a therapist might conceptualize the problem, the for¬ 
mulation and implementation of a treatment plan, or the trajectory of a disorder 
over a period of many years. In contrast to such brief descriptions, a detailed 
case study can provide a foundation on which to organize important informa¬ 
tion about a disorder. This enhances the student’s ability to understand and recall 
abstract theoretical and research issues. 

The purpose of Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology, 9e is therefore three¬ 
fold: (a) to provide detailed descriptions of a range of clinical problems, (b) to 
illustrate some of the ways in which these problems can be viewed and treated, 
and (c) to discuss some of the evidence that is available concerning the preva¬ 
lence and causes of the disorders in question. The book is appropriate for both 
undergraduate and graduate courses in abnormal psychology. It may also be use¬ 
ful in courses in psychiatric social work or nursing and could be helpful to stu¬ 
dents enrolled in various practicum courses that teach how best to conceptualize 
mental-health problems and plan treatment. It may be used on its own or as a 
supplement to a standard textbook in abnormal psychology. 

In selecting cases for inclusion in the book, we sampled from a variety of 
problems, ranging from psychotic disorders (e.g., schizophrenia and bipolar 
mood disorder) to personality disorders (e.g., paranoid and antisocial) to vari¬ 
ous disorders of childhood and aging (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity dis¬ 
order). We focused deliberately on cases that illustrate particular problems that 
are of interest to students of abnormal psychology. We do not mean to imply, 
however, that all the cases fit neatly into specific diagnostic molds. In addition to 
describing “classic” behavioral symptoms (e.g., hallucinations, compulsive ritu¬ 
als, or specific fears), we emphasized the social context in which these disorders 
appear as well as life problems that are significant in determining the person’s 
overall adjustment, even though they may not be relevant from a diagnostic 




vi Preface 


standpoint. For example, our case on hypertension considers issues in etiology 
and treatment when the person is African American. Several of the cases include 
a consideration of marital adjustment and parent-child relationships. 

Our coverage extends to examples of eating disorders, dissociative iden¬ 
tity disorder, gender identity disorder, borderline personality, and posttraumatic 
stress disorder (following rape). Each of these disorders represents an area that 
has received considerable attention in the contemporary literature, and each has 
been the focus of theoretical controversy. 

We have added one new chapter to this ninth edition. It describes a woman 
who experienced terrifying nightmares and an associated sleep paralysis. The new 
case provides important coverage of sleep disorders, which affect large numbers 
of people and have received increased attention in the professional literature. 

Our cognitive-behavioral perspective is clearly evident in most of these case 
discussions. Nevertheless, we also present and discuss alternative conceptual 
positions. The cases can therefore be used to show students how a given prob¬ 
lem can be reasonably viewed and treated from several different perspectives. 
Although most of the interventions described illustrate a cognitive-behavioral 
approach to treatment, we have also described biological treatments (e.g., medi¬ 
cation, electroconvulsive therapy, and psychosurgery) when they are relevant to 
the case. In some cases, the outcome was not positive. We have tried to present 
an honest view of the limitations, as well as the potential benefits, of various 
treatment programs. Note also that three of the cases were not in treatment. We 
believe that it is important to point out that many people who have psychological 
disorders do not see therapists. 

Each case study concludes with a discussion of current knowledge about 
causal factors. Some of these discussions are necessarily briefer than others. 
More research has been done on schizophrenia, for example, than on gender 
identity disorder or paranoid personality disorder. We had two goals in mind for 
these discussions. First, we have tried to use the case material to illustrate the 
application of research to individual clients’ problems. Second, we alert read¬ 
ers to important gaps in our knowledge of abnormal psychology, our abiding 
belief being that realizing what we do not know is as important as appreciating 
what we do know. All these discussions have been revised in the ninth edition to 
include new ideas and empirical evidence that are changing the way that particu¬ 
lar disorders are viewed and treated. 

We have included discussions of issues associated with gender, culture, and 
ethnicity in all the previous editions of this book. For example, issues of race 
and psychotherapy are considered in the case of hypertension. Attention to these 
issues, particularly those involving gender, have been strengthened in this ninth 
edition. The case on parasomnia (nightmare disorder) also discusses important 
issues related to race and gender. Our description of posttraumatic stress disor¬ 
der following rape trauma includes many issues that are particularly important 
for women (e.g., helpful and harmful ways in which other people react to the 



Preface vii 


victim; decisions by the victim, her therapist, and her professor about whether 
to report the rapist; and so on). Our discussion of the causes of major depression 
includes consideration of possible explanations for gender differences in this dis¬ 
order. The chapters on dissociative identity disorder and borderline personality 
disorder both discuss the impact of prior sexual abuse on subsequent develop¬ 
ment of psychopathology. Both cases of eating disorder involve extended con¬ 
sideration of cultural attitudes that affect women’s feelings and beliefs about 
themselves. These are only a few of the instances in which we have attempted to 
address gender issues in relation to the etiology and treatment of mental disor¬ 
ders. We are grateful to Patricia Lee Llewellyn (University of Virginia) for many 
helpful comments on these issues. 

All the cases in this book are based on actual clinical experience, prima¬ 
rily our own, but, in some instances, that of our colleagues and students. Various 
demographic characteristics (names, locations, and occupations) and some con¬ 
crete clinical details have been changed to protect the anonymity of clients and 
their families. In some instances, the cases are composites of clinical problems 
with which we have dealt. Our intent is not to put forth claims of efficacy and 
utility for any particular conceptualization or intervention but instead to illustrate 
the ways clinicians think about their work and implement abstract principles to 
help a client cope with life problems. The names used in the case studies are fic¬ 
titious; any resemblance to actual persons is purely coincidental. 

As in the first eight editions of this book, we have not identified the authors 
of specific case studies. This procedure has been adopted and maintained to pre¬ 
serve the clients’ anonymity. We are grateful to Amy Bertelson, Serrita Jane, 
Ron Thompson, Kevin Leach, and Kimble Richardson, who provided exten¬ 
sive consultation on five of these cases. We also thank Elana Farace and Sarah 
Liebman for drafting two others. 

We would like to thank the following reviewers for their helpful and con¬ 
structive comments: Eynav E. Accortt, Wright State University; Dorothy 
Bianco, Rhode Island College; Mia Smith Bynum, Purdue University; Bernardo 
Carducci, Indiana University Southeast; Ron Evans, Washburn University; Jan 
Hastrup, SUNY at Buffalo; Russell Jones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University; Katherine M. Kitzmann, University of Memphis; Patricia Lee 
Llewellyn, University of Virginia; Richard McNally, Harvard University; Janet 
Morahan Martin, Bryant College; Linda Musun Miller, University of Arkansas 
at Little Rock; Mark Pantle, Baylor University; Esther Rothblum, University 
of Vermont; Gary Sterner, Eastern Washington University; Sondra Solomon, 
University of Vermont; and John Wixted, University of California-San Diego. 

We also want to express our sincere appreciation to the superb staff at 
Wiley, especially Eileen McKeever, Associate Editor, Psychology; Christopher 
Johnson, Executive Editor, Psychology; Maura Gilligan, Editorial Assistant; and 
Yee Lyn Song, Assistant Production Editor. Their conscientious efforts were 
essential to the successful completion of this revision. 



viii Preface 


Finally, we remain grateful to our families for their continued love and 
encouragement. Gail Oltmanns and Matt Martin have both provided invaluable 
support throughout the preparation of this new edition. 

Thomas F. Oltmanns 
Michele T. Martin 
John M. Neale 
Gerald C. Davison 



CONTENTS 


Preface v 

1. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 1 

2. Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 17 

3. Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 35 

4. Hypertension in an African American Man 52 

5. Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 68 

6. Major Depressive Disorder 87 

7. Bipolar Disorder 102 

8. Somatization Disorder 115 

9. Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 130 

10. Psychotic Disorder (NOS), Substance Dependence, and Violence 145 

11. Alcohol Dependence 159 

12. Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature 

Ejaculation 171 

13. Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 188 

14. Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 202 

15. Eating Disorder: Anorexia Nervosa 221 

16. Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 234 

17. Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 251 

18. Paranoid Personality Disorder 265 

19. Borderline Personality Disorder 283 

20. Antisocial Personality Disorder: Psychopathy 297 

21. Autistic Disorder 309 

22. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 323 

23. Oppositional Defiant Disorder 336 

References 351 

Index 391 


ix 





CHAPTER 1 


Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 


Karen Rusa was a 30-year-old married woman and the mother of four children. 
Although she had been having anxiety-related problems for a number of years, 
she had never sought professional help prior to this time. During the preceding 
3 months, she had become increasingly depressed; her family physician finally 
suggested that she seek psychological services. 

For the past several months, Karen had been experiencing intrusive, repeti¬ 
tive thoughts that centered on her children’s safety. She frequently found her¬ 
self imagining that a serious accident had occurred, and she was unable to put 
these thoughts out of her mind. On one such occasion, she imagined that her 
son, Alan, had broken his leg playing football at school. There was no reason to 
believe that an accident had occurred, but Karen brooded about the possibility 
until she finally called the school to see if Alan was all right. Even after receiv¬ 
ing reassurance that he had not been hurt, she was somewhat surprised when he 
later arrived home unharmed. 

Karen also noted that her daily routine was seriously hampered by an exten¬ 
sive series of counting rituals that she performed throughout each day. Specific 
numbers had come to have a special meaning to Karen; she found that her preoc¬ 
cupation with these numbers was interfering with her ability to perform every¬ 
day activities. One example was grocery shopping. Karen believed that if she 
selected the first item (e.g., a box of cereal) on the shelf, something terrible 
would happen to her oldest child. If she selected the second item, some unknown 
disaster would befall her second child, and so on for the four children. The chil¬ 
dren’s ages were also important. The sixth item in a row, for example, was asso¬ 
ciated with her youngest child, who was 6 years old. Thus, specific items had to 
be avoided to ensure the safety of her children. Obviously, the rituals required 
continuing attention because the children’s ages changed. Karen’s preoccupation 
with numbers extended to other activities, most notably the pattern in which she 
smoked cigarettes and drank coffee. If she had one cigarette, she believed that 
she had to smoke at least four in a row or one of the children would be harmed 
in some way. If she drank one cup of coffee, she felt compelled to drink four. 


1 



2 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Karen acknowledged the irrationality of these rituals but, nevertheless, 
maintained that she felt much more comfortable when she observed them con¬ 
scientiously. When she was occasionally in too great a hurry to perform the ritu¬ 
als, she experienced considerable anxiety in the form of a subjective feeling of 
dread and apprehension. She described herself as tense, jumpy, and unable to 
relax during these periods. Her fears were most often confirmed because some¬ 
thing unfortunate invariably happened to one of the children within a few days 
after each such “failure.” The fact that minor accidents are likely to occur at a 
fairly high rate in any family of four children did not diminish Karen’s convic¬ 
tion that she had been directly responsible because of her inability to observe the 
numerical rules. 

In addition to her obsessive ideas and compulsive behaviors, Karen reported 
dissatisfaction with her marriage and problems in managing her children. Her 
husband, Tony, had been placed on complete physical disability 11 months prior 
to her first visit to the mental health center. Although he was only 32 years old, 
Tony suffered from a serious heart condition that made even the most routine 
physical exertion potentially dangerous. Since leaving his job as a clerk at a 
plumbing supply store, he had spent most of his time at home. He enjoyed lying 
on the couch watching television and did so for most of his waking hours. He 
had convinced Karen that she should be responsible for all the household chores 
and family errands. Her days were spent getting the children dressed, fed, and 
transported to school; cleaning; washing; shopping; and fetching potato chips, 
dip, and beer whenever Tony needed a snack. The inequity of this situation was 
apparent to Karen and was extremely frustrating, yet she found herself unable to 
handle it effectively. 

The children were also clearly out of her control. Robert, age 6, and Alan, 
age 8, were very active and mischievous. Neither responded well to parental dis¬ 
cipline, which was inconsistent at best. Both experienced behavioral problems at 
school, and Alan was being considered for placement in a special classroom for 
particularly disruptive children. The girls were also difficult to handle. Denise, 
age 9, and Jennifer, age 11, spent much of their time at home arguing with each 
other. Jennifer was moderately obese. Denise teased her mercilessly about her 
weight. After they had quarreled for some time, Jennifer would appeal tearfully 
to Karen, who would attempt to intervene on her behalf. Karen was becoming 
increasingly distressed by her inability to handle this confusing situation, and 
she was getting little, if any, help from Tony. During the past several weeks, she 
had been spending more and more time crying and hiding alone in her bedroom. 


Social History 


Karen was raised in New York City by Italian immigrant parents. She was the 
first of four children. Her family was deeply religious, and she was raised to be 
a devout Roman Catholic. She attended parochial schools from the first grade 




Chapter 1 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 3 


through high school and was a reasonably good student. Her memories of the 
strict practices of the church and school authorities were vivid. The formal ritu¬ 
als of the church played an important role in her life, as they did for the other 
members of her family. Beginning at an early age, Karen was taught that she 
had to observe many specific guidelines that governed social behavior within the 
church (not eating meat on Fridays, going to confession regularly, and so forth). 
She was told that her strict adherence to these norms would ensure the safety 
of her immortal soul, and conversely, that transgressions would be severely 
punished. 

The depth of her belief and the severity of its consequences can be seen in 
the following story, which Karen recalled during an early session. When she 
was 8 years old, Karen and her classmates at school were to receive their First 
Communion in the church. This is a particularly important and solemn occa¬ 
sion for Roman Catholics that signifies the child’s advancement to adult status 
in the church community. Before the child is allowed to partake in communion, 
however, a complete confession must be made of all prior sins. Karen was told 
that she was to confess all her sins, regardless of their severity or the time of 
their occurrence, to her priest, who would prescribe an appropriate penance. She 
remembered her parents’ and teachers’ warnings that if she failed to mention any 
of her sins, her soul would be banished to hell for eternity. This threat was still 
vivid in Karen’s mind many years later. Despite the terror aroused by these cir¬ 
cumstances, Karen intentionally failed to tell the priest about one of her sins; she 
had stolen a small picture book from her classroom and was now afraid either to 
return it or to tell anyone about the crime. She lived with intense guilt about this 
omission for several years and could remember having occasionally terrifying 
nightmares that centered on imagined punishments for not providing a complete 
confession. In subsequent years, Karen intensified her efforts to abide by even 
the minutest details of church regulations, but she continued to harbor the con¬ 
viction that she could never atone for this mortal sin. 

Karen remembered her parents as having been very strict disciplinarians. 
Her mother was apparently a rather unemotional and rigid person who had 
insisted on the maintenance of order and cleanliness in their household. Beyond 
her unerring adherence to religious rules and regulations, Karen’s mother kept 
the family on a tight schedule with regard to meals and other routine activities. 
When the children deviated from these guidelines, they were severely punished. 
Karen’s most positive recollections of interaction with her mother centered on 
their mutual participation in prescribed church functions. She did not remember 
her parents ever demonstrating affection for each other in front of their children. 

Karen married Tony after she graduated from high school, and she became 
pregnant two months later. During this pregnancy, she witnessed an unfortunate 
accident at her neighbor’s apartment. While Karen was chatting with her friend, 
the woman’s infant daughter crawled off the porch and was run over by another 
child riding a bicycle. The girl was seriously injured and remained in the hos¬ 
pital for several weeks. Shortly after this accident, Karen began experiencing 



4 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


repetitive, intrusive thoughts about injuring herself. At unpredictable but fre¬ 
quent intervals throughout the day, she would find herself thinking about jump¬ 
ing out of windows, walking in front of cars, and other similar dangerous 
behaviors. These thoughts were, of course, frightening to her, but she could not 
prevent their occurrence. When one of the thoughts did come into her mind, she 
attempted to get rid of it by quickly repeating a short prayer that she had learned 
as a child and then asking God for forgiveness for having entertained such a sin¬ 
ful impulse. This procedure was moderately successful as a temporary source of 
distraction, but it did not prevent the reappearance of a similar, intrusive thought 
several hours later. These thoughts of self-injury occurred less frequently and 
seemed less troublesome after the birth of her first child, Jennifer, perhaps 
because Karen was soon preoccupied with all the responsibilities of caring for 
the baby. 

During this same time, Karen began to be disillusioned with the church. Her 
distress centered on a number of reforms that had been introduced by Pope John 
XXIII and the ecumenical council. The Mass, for example, was no longer said 
in Latin, and nonclerical persons were allowed to administer various rites of the 
church. Similarly, church members were no longer admonished to give up meat 
on Fridays, and other rituals were modified or completely eliminated. Most peo¬ 
ple found these changes refreshing, but Karen was horrified. The church’s rituals 
had come to play a central role in her life. In de-emphasizing the importance 
of traditional rituals, the church was depriving Karen of her principal means of 
controlling her own destiny. She was extremely uncomfortable with these new 
practices and eventually stopped going to church altogether. 

When Jennifer was 9 months old, Karen once again became pregnant. She 
and Tony decided to move to the suburbs, where they would be able to afford a 
house with a yard in which the children could play. Although she was proud of 
their new home, Karen began to feel depressed during this period because she 
missed her old friends. 

Karen’s situation showed little change throughout the next few years. By 
the time she was 25 years old, she had four children. She found this responsi¬ 
bility overwhelming and was generally unhappy most of the time. Her relation¬ 
ship with Tony had essentially reached a stalemate; they were not satisfied with 
their marriage, but they agreed to stay together for the children. Although they 
did not fight with each other openly, a sense of covert tension and estrangement 
pervaded their relationship. Tony refused to participate in what he considered 
unnecessarily rigid and complicated household regulations, particularly those 
dealing with the children’s behavior. Karen had established very specific guide¬ 
lines for meals, bedtime, and so on but found that she was unable to enforce 
these rules by herself. She remained distant from Tony and resisted most of his 
attempts to display physical affection. Thus, overall, Karen was chronically 
unhappy and generally dissatisfied with her life, but she nevertheless clung to 
her miserable surroundings and established patterns of behavior out of fear that 
any change would be for the worse. 



Chapter 1 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 5 


This unhappy, yet tolerable, equilibrium was disturbed by Tony’s deterio¬ 
rating health. One day, while he was working at the store, he experienced sud¬ 
den chest pains and numbness in his extremities. Recognizing these symptoms 
as serious in nature (he had had high blood pressure for years and was therefore 
well informed in this regard), Tony asked a friend to drive him to the hospital. 
His experience was diagnosed as a mild heart attack. Further testing revealed 
serious structural abnormalities in his heart. He was eventually discharged from 
the hospital, given a complete medical disability, and laid off from his job. 

Karen became more and more depressed after Tony began staying home 
during the day. it was during this time that her fears about the children’s safety 
became clearly unreasonable, and she started performing her counting rituals. 
Karen realized that her situation was desperate because she felt that she had lost 
control of her own behavior and experienced considerable anxiety whenever she 
attempted to resist performing the rituals. At this point, she finally decided to 
seek professional help. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


The therapist saw the ritualistic behavior as one part of Karen’s overall difficult 
situation. Karen’s counting compulsion represented her attempt to reintroduce a 
sense of personal control over her own life. In this sense, the rituals were being 
performed instead of either the more socially acceptable religious activities 
that she had employed as a child or the more effective social skills that she had 
apparently never developed. For example, she was unassertive in her relationship 
with Tony. Instead of standing up for her rights, she would meekly acquiesce 
to even his most unreasonable demands. At the same time, she would become 
extremely frustrated and angry with him and would look for subtle ways to 
“even the score.” She was similarly unable to convey her appreciation to him 
on those (admittedly rare) occasions when he did please her. Treatment was 
therefore initially aimed at the development of interpersonal skills that would 
give Karen more control over her environment. It was hoped that as she was 
able to create a more satisfactory relationship with her husband and children, 
her increased competence would eliminate the necessity of turning to admittedly 
superstitious, ineffective attempts to achieve self-control. 

Karen quickly recognized her deficiency in this regard but was unable to 
change her behavior spontaneously. She and the therapist therefore agreed 
to pursue a systematic program of assertion training. The initial sessions in 
this sequence were devoted to a careful assessment of the situations in which 
Karen was unassertive. She was asked to keep a daily notebook of such situ¬ 
ations in which she noted the people involved, the nature of their interaction, 
and her perception of the situation, including what she thought would happen if 
she did behave assertively. Having identified typical problem situations, Karen 
and her therapist role-played several incidents as a way of introducing Karen to 




6 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


more appropriate responses. They also discussed Karen’s irrational fears associ¬ 
ated with assertion. These thoughts centered on her implicit belief that everyone 
should love her, and that if she stood up for her own rights, people would reject 
her. These irrational self-statements were inhibiting the expression of assertive 
behaviors. After Karen became proficient with such exercises in the therapy ses¬ 
sions, she was asked to start practicing her new skills in real-life situations out¬ 
side the clinic. 

After assertion training had produced some positive results, the therapist 
began teaching Karen more effective child-management skills. These were based 
primarily on procedures associated with instrumental learning (also known as 
operant conditioning). She was taught, for example, to ignore her daughters 
when they were quarreling and to reinforce them positively for playing together 
appropriately. Her efforts were initially channeled toward behaviors that could 
be changed easily. The most difficult problems, such as getting the children to 
stop fighting at mealtimes, were left until Karen had mastered some of the gen¬ 
eral principles of child management. 

In addition to these skill-training programs, the therapist also discussed 
Karen’s concerns about religion. It was clear that the church was still important 
to her and that she experienced considerable guilt and anxiety over her failure to 
attend services regularly. The fact that her children were not involved in church 
activities was also troubling to Karen. She worried that if any harm came to one 
of them, God would not protect them. For these reasons, Karen was encour¬ 
aged to visit several priests at churches in her area in an effort to find one who 
was more conservative and thus more compatible with her own views. Although 
most of the local priests had moved toward contemporary practices in their own 
churches, they did refer her to an older priest at a church somewhat farther from 
her neighborhood, who still adhered to several of the traditional rituals she had 
learned as a child. She made an appointment to visit this priest and was both 
pleased and relieved after their initial meeting. He was able to discuss with her 
some of the changes that had been made in the church. In some cases, he was 
able to explain the rationale behind a particular change in a way that was accept¬ 
able to her. This process was, no doubt, facilitated by the fact that he shared 
many of her concerns about abandoning traditional practices. Karen felt much 
more comfortable with this priest than she did with the liberal priest who was 
in charge of the church in her immediate neighborhood. Within weeks, she was 
once again attending church regularly with her four children. 

The combination of assertion training, parent education, and a renewed 
interest in church activities did lead to an important improvement in Karen’s 
mood. After 3 months of treatment, she reported an increased sense of self- 
confidence and an improvement in her family life. There was also some reduc¬ 
tion in her anxiety level. She continued to observe her number rituals, but they 
were somewhat less frequent, and when she did fail to perform the counting 
routines, she was not as distraught as she had been at the beginning of treatment. 



Chapter 1 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 7 


At this point, Karen’s rituals were addressed directly using a behavioral 
treatment method known as exposure and response prevention (ERP) (Tolin & 
Steketee, 2007). This procedure involves purposely exposing the person to stim¬ 
uli that provoke intense anxiety (either in imagination or in reality) for extended 
periods of time while preventing the person from performing anxiety-reducing 
rituals. Karen was asked to smoke a single cigarette at the beginning of a therapy 
session. When she was finished with the cigarette, she began to feel anxious and 
worry about her oldest daughter. She was then instructed to resist the temptation 
to smoke another cigarette. Thus, the response that she typically employed to 
neutralize her anxiety and to control the ruminations was prevented. The thera¬ 
pist believed that this type of prolonged exposure to the anxiety-provoking situ¬ 
ation would lead to a reduction in Karen’s anxiety. The procedure was carried 
out during four consecutive 2-hour sessions. Karen was encouraged to practice 
the same response-prevention procedure on her own between sessions. When 
she had mastered the cigarette-smoking problem, the procedure was extended 
progressively to other similar situations in which she had been concerned about 
numbers. 

Treatment was terminated after 20 sessions. Karen was no longer depressed 
and had not engaged in her compulsive counting rituals for 4 weeks. The chil¬ 
dren were better behaved at home, and Karen had plans to institute further 
changes in this regard. Her relationship with Tony was somewhat improved. 
Although he had become quite upset initially when Karen began to assert herself, 
he became more cooperative when he saw an improvement in her adjustment. 


Discussion 


Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is included in the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR ; APA, 2000, pp. 462^-63) 
under the general heading of Anxiety Disorders. It is defined by the following 
criteria: 

1. Either obsessions or compulsions: 

Obsessions as defined by (a), (b), (c), and (d): 

a. Recurrent and persistent thoughts, impulses, or images that are experi¬ 
enced, at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and inappropri¬ 
ate, and that cause marked anxiety or distress. 

b. The thoughts, impulses, or images are not simply excessive worries 
about real-life problems. 

c. The person attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, impulses, or 
images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action. 

d. The person recognizes that the obsessional thoughts, impulses, or 
images are a product of his or her own mind. 




8 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Compulsions as defined by (a) and (b): 

a. The person feels driven to perform repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand 
washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts (e.g., praying, counting, 
repeating words silently) in response to an obsession, or according to 
rules that must be applied rigidly. 

b. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing dis¬ 
tress or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these 
behaviors or mental acts either are not connected in a realistic way 
with what they are designed to neutralize or prevent, or are clearly 
excessive. 

2 . At some point during the course of the disorder, the person has recognized 
that the obsessions or compulsions are excessive or unreasonable. 

3 . The obsessions or compulsions cause marked distress, are time consuming 
(take more than 1 hour a day), or significantly interfere with the person’s 
normal routine, occupational (or academic) functioning, or usual social 
activities or relationships. 

The most common types of obsessions have been described by Rasmussen 
and Eisen (1992), who recorded the frequency of specific symptoms in a sample 
of more than 500 patients. The numbers in parentheses indicate the percentage of 
patients who exhibited each type of obsession. Most of the patients (72%) had 
multiple obsessions. 

Fear of contamination (50%); A fear of exposure to stimuli such as dirt, germs, 
poison, or radiation. The person’s concern may include fear that other people, as 
well as themselves, will become ill. Fear of contamination is most often coupled 
with compulsive hand washing. 

Pathological doubt (42%); An inclination to worry that something bad is going to 
happen because a task has not been completed correctly. People with this symp¬ 
tom often develop counting rituals that may include a complex system of good 
numbers and bad numbers. They may repeat certain actions a particular magical 
number of times (as in Karen’s case). 

Somatic obsessions (33%); The irrational, persistent fear of developing a serious 
life-threatening illness (often indistinguishable from hypochondriasis, i.e., fear of 
having some disease despite reassurance from a physician that the disease is not 
present). 

Need for symmetry (32%); An extreme need to have objects or events in a certain 
order or position, to do and undo certain motor actions in an exact fashion, or to 
have things exactly symmetric or “evened up.” 

Aggressive obsessions (31%); Recurrent, ghastly thoughts or images that the per¬ 
son has committed a violent or an inappropriately aggressive act. 

Sexual obsessions (24%); Repeated, distressing thoughts about, or impulses to 
perform, inappropriate sexual behaviors. 



Chapter 1 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 9 


In addition to provoking anxiety, sexual and aggressive obsessions are asso¬ 
ciated with exaggerated feelings of shame and guilt. People with this symptom 
may seek constant reassurance from friends (or therapists) that they are not 
really capable of performing such actions. 

Compulsions represent patterns of ritualistic behavior and thinking that are 
usually performed in response to an obsession. Whereas obsessions lead to an 
increase in subjective anxiety, compulsions reduce the person’s anxiety or discom¬ 
fort. Compulsive behavior is designed to neutralize or to prevent discomfort or 
some dreaded event or situation. Most patients who seek treatment for obsessive 
symptoms also exhibit compulsive behaviors (Foa & Franklin, 2001; Parmet, Glass, 
& Glass, 2004). Compulsive patients fall into two primary groups: “cleaners” and 
“checkers.” Cleaning and washing rituals are associated with fear of contact with 
contaminating objects. For example, a patient who is afraid of contamination by 
germs or bodily secretions may spend hours each day bathing or disinfecting his or 
her home. This ritualistic behavior restores the patient’s sense of safety. Repetitive 
checking, on the other hand, is more often motivated by a fear of some catastrophic 
event. For example, a patient who experiences obsessive thoughts about gas explo¬ 
sions may engage in compulsive checking of the burners on a gas stove. 

Some other behaviors that take a repetitive form and are associated with 
either a decrease or increase in anxiety have also been considered “compulsive” 
in the popular media. These include problems such as gambling, drug addiction, 
and exhibitionism. However, some important distinctions can be made between 
these actions and truly compulsive behaviors. First, addictive behaviors involve a 
pleasure-seeking component that is absent in compulsive behaviors. Second, the 
anxiety that is associated with the performance of criminal activities (e.g., steal¬ 
ing) is appropriate in light of social sanctions; obsessive-compulsive patients 
experience anxiety that is inappropriate to the situation. 

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) should be distinguished from obses¬ 
sive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD). The latter does not involve spe¬ 
cific ritualistic behaviors; it is intended to refer to a general personality style. 
People with an obsessive-compulsive personality are preoccupied with order¬ 
liness and perfectionism as well as mental and interpersonal control. They are 
inflexible and overly devoted to work to the point that they avoid leisure activi¬ 
ties and ignore friendships. 

The phobic disorders (i.e., specific phobia, social phobia, and agoraphobia) 
are similar to OCD because they involve severe anxiety and are characterized 
by behaviors that are designed to reduce that anxiety. Some obsessive-compulsive 
patients also display phobic avoidance of situations associated with anxiety 
about dirt or contamination. There are, however, some important differences 
between OCD and the phobic disorders. For example, phobic patients do not 
show the same tendency toward superstitious or “magical” thinking that is often 
characteristic of obsessive-compulsive patients, nor do they manifest compulsive 
symptoms. Also, for the phobic patient, the anxiety-inducing stimulus is unre¬ 
lated to the content of any obsessions the patient may experience. 



10 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Obsessive thoughts should also be distinguished from delusional beliefs. 
Two criteria are important in this regard. First, patients with OCD try, often 
desperately, to resist their intrusive ideas, whereas delusional patients do not. 
Second, most OCD patients are ambivalent about their thoughts; they realize 
the essential absurdity of their obsessions and compulsions at the same time 
that they are preoccupied with them. Some OCD patients do have relatively 
poor insight regarding the senseless nature of their obsessions, but DSM-IV-TR 
requires for a diagnosis of OCD that, at some point during the course of the dis¬ 
order, the person must recognize that the obsessions or compulsions are exces¬ 
sive or unreasonable (Eisen, Phillips, & Rasmussen, 1999). 

Depression is a common complication of OCD. Two out of every three 
patients with OCD have experienced at least one episode of major depression 
at some point during their lives. The relationship between these phenomena is 
unclear. Sometimes compulsive symptoms appear before the onset of depres¬ 
sion; in other cases, this relationship is reversed. The successful treatment or 
alleviation of depressive symptoms does not invariably lead to a reduction in 
the frequency of compulsive behaviors and vice versa (Abramowitz, Franklin, 
Street, Kozak, & Foa, 2000). 

Although OCD was previously thought to be relatively rare, results from 
modern epidemiological studies suggest that milder forms of the disorder may 
affect between 2 and 3% of the general population at some point during their 
lives (Fullana et al., 2009). Prevalence rates among untreated community resi¬ 
dents must be interpreted with caution, however, because there is disagreement 
about the best assessment procedures to use in collecting information and the 
most appropriate diagnostic criteria (Fontenelle, Mendlowicz, & Versiani, 2006). 
Data from England suggest that the true prevalence of OCD in the community 
may be closer to 1% (Torres et ah, 2006). 

Relatively little information is available regarding conditions that set the 
stage for later development of OCD. Nevertheless, some interesting clues were 
provided in one classic study. Kringlen (1970) reported the results of a 20-year 
follow-up assessment of 91 patients who had been hospitalized with obsessive- 
compulsive disorder. More than 80% of these patients had exhibited nervous 
symptoms as children. They had typically been raised in strict, puritanical 
homes. The average age of onset for compulsive symptoms in female patients 
was between 10 and 20 years, although most of the women did not seek profes¬ 
sional help until some years later. More than half of the patients showed an acute 
onset of symptoms following a specific stressful event. Marital problems were 
common among compulsive patients. 

The prognosis for patients with OCD is mixed. Although the disorder can 
last many years, most patients do improve. One study conducted follow-up 
assessments with a group of patients 40 years after they had been treated in 
a hospital in Sweden (Skoog & Skoog, 1999). This was, of course, a group 
of severely disturbed patients because most people with OCD do not need 
to be treated in an inpatient setting. Nevertheless, the results suggest that 



Chapter 1 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 11 


many patients recover from OCD. At the time of the final follow-up, half 
of the patients had recovered from their disorder (defined as the absence of 
clinically relevant symptoms for at least 5 years). Another 30% showed 
some improvement, although they still experienced clinical symptoms. 
Approximately 20% of OCD patients do not improve following extended 
treatment (Besiroglu et al., 2007). 

Karen was in many ways a typical OCD patient. She had, in fact, been 
raised in a strict, puritanical family setting. As a child, she was generally anxious 
and concerned with order and rituals. Since mid-adolescence, Karen had experi¬ 
enced difficulty with intrusive, repetitive ideas that she found distressing. These 
problems would come and go without apparent reason. She was also prone to 
serious depression. Karen’s family background is also consistent with the lit¬ 
erature on OCD (e.g., Pauls et al., 1995). There is a relatively high incidence 
of psychiatric anomalies—particularly obsessional traits, anxious personalities, 
and mood disturbances—among the biological relatives of obsessive-compulsive 
patients. 

The similarity in behavior between many obsessive-compulsive patients 
and their parents probably reflects the influence of both genetic and environ¬ 
mental variables (Grabe et al., 2006; Hudziak et al., 2004). In Karen’s case, her 
mother’s rigid, moralistic behavior may have had an important influence on the 
development of later symptoms. Karen’s mother provided a salient model for her 
daughter’s subsequent compulsive behavior. She also reinforced early tendencies 
toward such response patterns. 

Theoretical Perspectives and Treatment Implications 

According to traditional psychoanalytic theory, compulsive symptoms are the 
product of the ego’s unconscious attempt to fend off anxiety associated with hos¬ 
tile impulses. Freud (1909, 1925) argued that compulsive patients had experi¬ 
enced overly harsh toilet training and were therefore fixated in the anal-sadistic 
stage of development. Such individuals presumably suffer serious conflict over 
the expression of anger. Because these feelings are dangerous, or unaccept¬ 
able to the ego, the anticipation of their expression is seen as anxiety provok¬ 
ing. This anxiety is dealt with primarily through the defense mechanism known 
as reaction formation, in which the original impulse (anger) is transformed into 
its antithesis (love or oversolicitude). This conceptual approach is not incompat¬ 
ible with Karen’s situation. Her principal symptoms were compulsive rituals that 
were intended to protect her children from harm. But her feelings about her chil¬ 
dren were, in fact, ambivalent. It would not be unreasonable to assume that she 
was most often very angry with them, perhaps to the point that she might have 
considered doing them physical harm. Of course, this impulse would be anxiety 
provoking to the ego, which would convert it to its opposite form. Thus, instead 
of injuring the children, she would spend a good deal of her time every day per¬ 
forming irrational responses aimed at protecting them. 



12 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Most contemporary therapists agree that people with OCD have trouble 
expressing anger (Moritz, 2011; Osborn, 1998). Some recognition was given 
to these considerations in the treatment that was employed. Karen’s anger 
and frustration were identified as central features of her adjustment problems, 
but the therapeutic procedures went beyond the goal of insight-oriented treat¬ 
ment. Karen’s recognition of her anger and hostility was not sufficient to effect 
change; specific training procedures were used to help her develop more adap¬ 
tive responses. 

Learning theorists would view Karen’s problems in a distinctly different 
fashion (Abramowitz, Taylor, & McKay, 2007; Houts, 2005). Within this general 
model, two factors would be given primary consideration. Both involve the prin¬ 
ciple of negative reinforcement, which states that the probability of a response 
is increased if it leads to the termination of an aversive stimulus. Consider, for 
example, the net effect of Karen’s rituals. Their performance ensured that she 
would be away from her home for extended periods of time. If she went to her 
neighbor’s house for coffee, she would be gone for at least two hours before she 
could consume enough cups and smoke enough cigarettes to satisfy the rituals. 
Grocery shopping, which she did by herself, had also turned into a long, compli¬ 
cated process. Given that being at home with her family was mostly an aversive 
experience for Karen, her rituals might be seen as an operant response that was 
being maintained by negative reinforcement. 

A behavioral clinician would be most likely to point to the anxiety reduction 
associated with the performance of the rituals. Whenever Karen was engaged in 
an activity that reminded her of numbers and, consequently, her children, she 
became anxious. She was able to neutralize this anxiety temporarily by counting 
the appropriate number of boxes and so on. This ritual was therefore reinforced 
and maintained by the reduction of anxiety. This notion is similar to the psycho¬ 
analytic view in that the symptom is produced as a means of reducing tension. 
The two theories differ in that the behavioral view does not see her anxiety as 
being directly attributable to the unconscious urge to harm her children, nor does 
the behavioral view hold that the anxiety reduction is mediated by an uncon¬ 
sciously activated defense mechanism. 

Some elements of the behavioral view were incorporated into the treatment 
procedure followed with Karen. In particular, by teaching her to be more assertive 
and to manage her children more effectively, the therapist was able to make her 
home life less aversive. She now experienced more pleasurable interactions with 
her children and her husband, and one important source of negative reinforcement 
for her rituals was removed. Unfortunately, this view of human behavior is fairly 
limited. In particular, it does not account for the importance of cognitive events. 
By focusing exclusively on environmental events, behaviorists may ignore impor¬ 
tant factors associated with the client’s perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes. These 
variables also seemed to play an important role in Karen’s problem. 

Cognitive theories regarding the etiology of OCD emphasize the impor¬ 
tance of excessive feelings of responsibility and guilt (Shapiro & Stewart, 2011). 



Chapter 1 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 13 


This viewpoint begins with the recognition that most normal people experience 
intrusive thoughts from time to time, especially when they have been exposed 
to stress or negative mood states. Most intrusive thoughts do not become per¬ 
sistent or troublesome because people do not assign special meaning to them. 
According to the cognitive model, obsessions may develop if people interpret 
their intrusive thoughts as proof that they will be responsible for harm (to them¬ 
selves or others) if they do not do something immediately to correct the thought. 
People most likely to develop OCD may be those who (a) learned a broad sense 
of responsibility and a high level of conscientiousness at an early age, (b) were 
exposed to rigid and extreme codes of conduct and duty (e.g., have learned that 
some thoughts are particularly dangerous or unacceptable), and (c) experienced 
a critical incident in which their action (or inaction) or their thoughts seemed to 
be connected to a harmful incident that affected them or someone else. Alarmed 
by the intrusive appearance of forbidden thoughts, the person may struggle to 
avoid them, but cognitive events are difficult to control. In fact, active attempts 
at thought suppression often backfire and increase the severity of the problem 
(Wegner, 1994). This vicious negative feedback loop magnifies feelings of help¬ 
lessness and loss of control and also serves to focus attention on the content of 
unwanted thoughts. The person’s anxiety level continues to escalate, and com¬ 
pulsive rituals are employed in an attempt to regain control over mental events as 
well as life experiences. 

The relevance of this perspective to Karen’s case is clear. She had experi¬ 
enced frequent intrusive thoughts related to her children’s safety, and she did 
believe that a failure to act in response to these thoughts would result in harm 
coming to her children. As a child, Karen had been taught that certain thoughts 
and ideas were bad and that strict observation of the rituals of the church would 
guarantee her salvation and prevent harm from coming to her. These rituals 
became the primary means for controlling her fate and ensuring her safety. As 
an adult, Karen found herself stripped of these control mechanisms. The church 
now maintained that salvation (or the protection of one’s soul) depended more 
on faith than on the performance of specific overt behaviors. When Karen expe¬ 
rienced the critical incident in which her friend’s infant daughter was injured, 
and she began to experience intrusive thoughts about harming herself, she turned 
to the use of private prayers in an attempt to protect herself. In some ways, 
Karen’s subsequent development of counting rituals represented a substitute for 
the formal religious practices she had learned as a child. She admitted that they 
were irrational and probably unnecessary, but they did reduce her immediate 
anxiety in much the same way that going to church had left her with a comfort¬ 
ing feeling as a child. 

Karen's treatment addressed various cognitive factors, including efforts to 
improve her sense of self-control. Treatment was aimed initially at reducing the 
level of stress, improving Karen’s mood, and giving her alternative means of 
controlling her environment, such as assertion training and instruction in parent¬ 
ing skills. Considering her deeply ingrained religious beliefs, it was also judged 



14 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


necessary to help her reestablish contact with the church. After these procedures 
had achieved some modest success, it was possible to attack the counting rituals 
directly through the use of exposure and response prevention. A cognitive thera¬ 
pist would view the process of exposure and response prevention as a kind of 
“behavioral experiment” in which the person is given an opportunity to discon- 
firm exaggerated beliefs about responsibility (i.e., “if I do not count the cereal 
boxes, something bad will happen to my children”). 

An extensive body of evidence indicates that behavior therapy is effective in 
treating compulsive disorders (Houghton, Saxon, Bradburn, Ricketts, & Hardy, 
2010; Tolin et ah, 2007). The most useful procedure seems to be in vivo (i.e., 
in the natural environment) exposure coupled with response prevention (ERP). 
Studies that have compared ERP with control treatments, such as applied relaxa¬ 
tion, have found that patients who receive ERP (typically between 15 and 20 
sessions) are more likely to experience substantial improvement. Some patients, 
of course, refuse to enter or drop out of behavioral treatment, perhaps because 
it is initially anxiety provoking. Motivational interviewing can be used as an 
additional procedure to increase adherence to behavioral treatment methods 
(Riccardi, Timpano, & Schmidt, 2010). Among those who do complete ERP, 
approximately 80% have been classified as improved, and most OCD patients 
maintain these improvements several months after the end of treatment. 

Cognitive therapy is another psychological approach to the treatment of 
OCD (Abramowitz, 2010; Salkovskis, 1999). It is concerned primarily with 
the meanings that a person assigns to intrusive thoughts, images, and impulses. 
Symptoms of OCD are presumably more likely to occur if the person inter¬ 
prets the thoughts as an unquestionable sign that he or she is responsible for 
either causing or preventing harm that might come to oneself or other people. 
Cognitive therapy helps the person develop and use different interpretations 
of intrusive thoughts that do not require or motivate the person to continue to 
engage in compulsive rituals that are clearly ineffective and self-defeating. 
Treatment outcome studies report that this type of cognitive therapy can be an 
effective form of treatment for people with OCD (McLean et al., 2001). 

Medication is also beneficial for many patients. Clomipramine (Anafranil) 
has relatively specific effects in reducing OCD symptoms; its therapeutic effects 
cannot be attributed solely to a reduction in comorbid depressive symptoms 
(Kim, Koo, & Kim, 2010). Sustained improvement depends on continued use of 
the drug. Most patients experience a return of OCD symptoms within 4 weeks 
after they stop taking the medication. The newer generation of antidepressant 
drugs known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), including fluox¬ 
etine (Prozac), fluvoxanrine (Luvox), and sertraline (Zoloft), has also been used 
with OCD patients. Controlled studies indicate that these drugs are also effective 
in the treatment of OCD (Dell’Osso, Nestadt, Allen, & Hollander, 2006). The 
SSRIs are often preferred to other forms of medication because they have fewer 
side effects. 



Chapter 1 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 15 


Several issues will need to be addressed in future studies of treatment out¬ 
come. Relatively few direct comparisons of medication and ERP have been 
reported. It is not clear whether the combination of pharmacological and behav¬ 
ioral treatments is more effective than either one by itself (Albert & Brunatto, 
2009). Perhaps more important, it is not currently possible to predict whether a 
particular patient will respond better to ERP or to medication. In actual clinical 
practice, medication is often used in combination with behavioral therapy for the 
treatment of OCD. 

When both psychotherapy and medication fail, one other form of treatment 
may be considered: neurosurgery, which refers to techniques in which neural 
pathways in the brain are surgically altered in an effort to change the person’s 
behavior. Although neurosurgery was originally intended to be used with psy¬ 
chotic patients, clinical research indicates that it may be most effective with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (Csigo et al., 2010). One longitudinal study 
described 26 patients who had received neurosurgery after failing to respond to 
all other forms of treatment. In comparison to similar OCD patients who had not 
received surgery, 10 of the 26 patients were obviously improved several years 
after the procedure was performed, 6 others showed mild improvement, 6 were 
unchanged, and 4 had gotten worse (Hay et al., 1993). Because the duration of 
illness prior to surgery was several years for all the patients in this study, the 
reported rates of improvement are probably not due to placebo effects or sponta¬ 
neous remission. 

These results cannot be ignored, but they should also be interpreted with 
considerable caution. First, it is virtually impossible to conduct a double-blind 
evaluation of neurosurgery. Second, surgical procedures have varied widely 
across studies, thus making general statements about neurosurgery questionable. 
Third, and perhaps most important, neurosurgery may produce general changes 
in the patient's intellectual and emotional capacities. These changes remain 
unpredictable and poorly understood. Thus, most investigators agree that such 
radical procedures should be considered only when the patient’s symptoms are 
chronic and severely disturbing and when other treatment programs have already 
been unsuccessful. 


Discussion Questions 


1. What is the difference between an obsession and a delusional belief? In 
what ways are obsessions different from the everyday worries that all of us 
experience? 

2. Most people experience brief intrusive thoughts, impulses, and images on a 
regular basis. Could the ability to experience such thoughts be adaptive, from 
an evolutionary perspective? When does the pattern cross the line to become 
maladaptive? 




16 


Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


3. What impact does obsessive-compulsive disorder have on other members of 
a patient’s family? Should the person's spouse agree to tolerate or participate 
in compulsive rituals, such as special cleaning or checking procedures? 

4 . Exposure and response prevention is a challenging treatment procedure that 
can be anxiety provoking for patients. How hard should therapists push their 
patients to participate in treatments that will be upsetting in the short run if 
they know that they will be successful in the long run? 



CHAPTER 2 


Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 


Dennis Holt was 31 years old, divorced, and a successful insurance salesman. 
He had experienced panic attacks on several occasions during the past 10 years, 
but he did not seek psychological treatment until shortly after the last incident. 
It happened while Dennis and his fiancee, Elaine, were doing their Christmas 
shopping at a local mall. Their first stop was a large department store, where 
Elaine hoped to find a present for her mother. Dennis was in a good mood when 
they arrived at the store. Although he was usually uneasy in large crowds of 
people, he was also caught up in the holiday spirit and was looking forward to 
spending the bonus that he had recently received from his company. Ten min¬ 
utes after they began shopping, Dennis suddenly felt very sick. His hands began 
to tremble uncontrollably, his vision became blurred, and his body felt weak all 
over. He experienced a tremendous pressure on his chest and began to gasp for 
breath, sensing that he was about to smother. These dramatic physical symp¬ 
toms were accompanied by an overwhelming sensation of apprehension. He was 
terrified but did not know why. Without saying anything to Elaine, he whirled 
and dashed from the store, seeking refuge in their car, which was parked out¬ 
side. Once there, he rolled down the windows to let in more air, lay down on the 
back seat, and closed his eyes. He continued to feel dizzy and short of breath for 
about 10 minutes more. 

Elaine did not find him for more than an hour because she had been brows¬ 
ing in an adjacent aisle and had not seen him flee from the store. When she 
noticed that he was gone, she looked for him in other stores before she realized 
that something was wrong and finally decided to check the car. This was the first 
panic attack that Dennis had experienced since he and Elaine had begun dating 
several months previously. After they returned to his apartment, he explained 
what had happened and his past history of attacks in somewhat greater detail; 
she persuaded him to seek professional help. 

When Dennis arrived at the psychological clinic for his first appointment, 
he was neatly dressed in an expensive suit. He was five minutes early, so the 
receptionist asked him if he would like to take a seat in the large, comfortably 


17 



18 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


furnished waiting room where several other clients were sitting. Politely indicat¬ 
ing that he would prefer to stand, Dennis leaned casually against the corridor 
wall. Everything about his physical appearance—his posture, his neatly trimmed 
hair, his friendly smile—conveyed a sense of confidence and success. Nothing 
betrayed the real sense of dread he had struggled with since he had promised 
Elaine that he would consult a psychologist. Was he, in fact, crazy? He wanted 
help, but he did not want anyone to think that he was emotionally unstable. 

The first interview was not very productive. Dennis cracked jokes with the 
psychologist and attempted to engage in an endless sequence of witty small talk. 
In response to the psychologist’s persistent queries, Dennis explained that he had 
promised his fiancee that he would seek some advice about his intermittent panic 
attacks. Nevertheless, he was reluctant to admit that he had any really serious 
problems, and he evaded many questions pertaining to his current adjustment. 
Dennis seemed intent on convincing the psychologist that he did not have a seri¬ 
ous psychological problem. He continued to chat on a superficial level and, at 
one point, even began asking the psychologist whether she had adequate life 
insurance coverage. 

In subsequent sessions, it became clear that the panic attacks, which never 
occurred more than two or three times per year, were simply the most dramatic 
of Dennis’s problems. He was also an extremely tense and anxious person 
between attacks. He frequently experienced severe headaches that sometimes 
lasted for several hours. These generally took the form of a steady, diffuse pain 
across his forehead. Dennis also complained that he could not relax, noting that 
he suffered from chronic muscle tension and occasional insomnia. His job often 
required that he work late in the evening, visiting people in their homes after 
dinner. When he returned to his apartment, he was always “wound up’’ and on 
edge, unable to sleep. He had tried various distractions and popular remedies, 
but nothing had worked. 

Dennis was very self-conscious. Although he was an attractive man and one 
of the most successful salespersons in his firm, he worried constantly about what 
others thought of him. This concern was obvious in his behavior both before 
and after sessions at the clinic. At the end of every session, he seemed to make 
a point of joking loudly so that anyone outside the psychologist’s office would 
hear the laughter. He would then open the door, as he continued to chuckle, 
and say something like, “Well, Alicia [the therapist’s first name], that was a lot 
of fun. Let’s get together again soon!” as he left her office. The most peculiar 
incident of this sort occurred prior to the fourth treatment session. Dennis had 
avoided the clinic waiting room on past visits, but this time it happened that he 
and his therapist met at a location that required them to walk through the wait¬ 
ing room together to reach her office. Thinking nothing of it, the therapist set 
off across the room in which several other clients were waiting, and Dennis 
quickly followed. When they reached the middle of the long room, Dennis sud¬ 
denly clasped his right arm around her shoulders, smiled, and in a voice that was 
slightly too loud said, “Well, Alicia, what’s up? How can I help you today?” The 



Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 19 


therapist was taken completely by surprise but said nothing until they reached 
her office. Dennis quickly closed the door and leaned against the wall, holding 
his hand over his heart as he gulped for air. He was visibly shaken. After he had 
caught his breath, he apologized profusely and explained that he did not know 
what had come over him. He said that he had always been afraid that the other 
people in the clinic, particularly the other clients, would realize that he was a cli¬ 
ent and therefore think he was crazy. He had become extremely uncomfortable 
as they walked across the waiting room and had been unable to resist the urge to 
divert attention from himself by seeming to be a therapist. 

This preoccupation with social evaluation was also evident in Dennis’s work. 
He became extremely tense whenever he was about to call on a prospective cli¬ 
ent. Between the point at which an appointment was arranged and his arrival at 
the person’s home, Dennis worried constantly. Would he or she like him? Could 
he make the sale? His anxiety became most exaggerated as he drove his car to 
the person’s home. In an effort to cope with this anxiety, Dennis had constructed 
a 45-minute audio recording that he played for himself in the car. The recording 
contained a long pep talk, in his own voice, in which he continually reassured and 
encouraged himself: “Go out there and charm ’em, Dennis. You’re the best damn 
salesman this company’s ever had! They’re gonna be putty in your hands. Flash 
that smile, and they’ll love you!” and on and on. Unfortunately, the net effect of 
the recording was probably an increase to his tension. Despite this anxiety, he 
managed to perform effectively in the selling role, just as he was able to project 
an air of confidence in the clinic. But, on the inside, he was miserable. Every 2 or 
3 months, he would become convinced that he could no longer stand the tension 
and decide to quit his job. Then he would make a big sale or receive a bonus for 
exceeding his quota for that period and change his mind. 

Social History 


Dennis was an only child. His father was an accountant, and his mother was an 
elementary-school teacher. No one else in his family had been treated for adjust¬ 
ment problems. 

Dennis and his mother got along well, but his relationship with his father 
had always been difficult. His father was a demanding perfectionist who held 
very high, probably unrealistic, expectations for Dennis. When Dennis was in 
elementary school, his father always wanted him to be the best athlete and the 
best student in his class. Although Dennis was adequate in both of these areas, 
he did not excel in either. His father frequently expressed the hope that Dennis 
would become an aeronautical engineer when he grew up. Now that Dennis 
was working as an insurance salesman, his father never missed an opportunity 
to express his disapproval and disappointment. He was also unhappy about 
Dennis’s previous divorce. When his parents came to visit, Dennis and his father 
usually ended up in an argument. 




20 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Dennis remembered being shy as a child. Nevertheless, he enjoyed the com¬ 
pany of other children and always had a number of friends. When he reached 
adolescence, he was particularly timid around girls. In an effort to overcome his 
shyness, he joined the high school drama club and played bit parts in several of 
its productions. This experience provided an easy avenue for meeting other stu¬ 
dents with whom he became friends. He also learned that he could speak in front 
of a group of people without making a fool of himself, but he continued to feel 
uncomfortable in public-speaking and social situations. 

After graduating from high school, Dennis attended a private liberal arts 
college for two years. Although he had been a reasonably good student in high 
school, he began to experience academic problems in college. He attributed his 
sporadic performance to test anxiety. In his own words, he “choked” on exami¬ 
nations. Shortly after he entered the classroom, the palms of his hands would 
begin to perspire profusely. Then his breathing would become more rapid and 
shallow, and his mouth would become very dry. On the worst occasions, his 
mind would go blank. 

Some of his instructors were sympathetic to the problem and allowed him 
to take extra time to finish examinations; others permitted him to turn in sup¬ 
plementary papers that were written out of class. Nevertheless, his grades began 
to suffer, and by the end of his first year, he was placed on academic probation. 

During his second year in college, Dennis began to experience gastrointes¬ 
tinal problems. He had always seemed to have a sensitive stomach and avoided 
rich or fried foods that often led to excessive flatulence or nausea. Now the symp¬ 
toms were getting worse. He suffered intermittently from constipation, cramp¬ 
ing, and diarrhea. He would frequently go for 3 or 4 days without having a bowel 
movement. During these periods, he experienced considerable discomfort and 
occasional severe cramps in his lower abdominal tract. These problems persisted 
for several months until, at the urging of his roommate, Dennis finally made an 
appointment for a complete gastrointestinal examination at the local hospital. The 
physicians were unable to find any evidence of structural pathology and diag¬ 
nosed Dennis’s problems as irritable bowel syndrome. They prescribed some 
medication, but Dennis continued to suffer from intermittent bowel problems. 

Dennis had several girlfriends and dated regularly throughout high school 
and college. During his sophomore year in college, he developed a serious rela¬ 
tionship with Mary, who was a freshman at the same school. She and Dennis 
shared some interests and enjoyed each other’s company, so they spent a great 
deal of time together. At the end of the academic year, Dennis decided that he 
had had enough of college. He was bored with his classes and tired of the con¬ 
tinual pressure from his parents to get better grades. An older friend of his had 
recently landed a well-paying job with an insurance firm, so Dennis decided that 
he would complete applications with a number of companies. He was offered a 
position in sales with a company in a nearby state. Mary decided that she would 
also drop out of school. She and Dennis began living together, and they were 
married 2 years later. 



Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 21 


Dennis and Mary were reasonably happy for the first 3 years. He was suc¬ 
cessful at his job, and she eventually became a licensed realtor. As they were both 
promoted by their respective firms, they found themselves spending more and 
more time working and less and less time with each other. Their interests also 
began to diverge. When Mary had some time off or an evening free, she liked to 
go out to restaurants and parties. Dennis liked to stay home and watch television. 

Dennis’s first real panic attack occurred when he was 24 years old. He and 
Mary were at a dinner theater with three other couples, including Mary’s boss 
and his wife. The evening had been planned for several weeks, despite Dennis’s 
repeated objections. He was self-conscious about eating in public and did not 
care for Mary’s colleagues; he had finally agreed to accompany her because it 
seemed that it would be important for her advancement in the firm. He was also 
looking forward to seeing the play, which would be performed after the meal 
was served. As the meal progressed, Dennis began to feel increasingly uncom¬ 
fortable. He was particularly concerned that he might experience one of his gas¬ 
trointestinal attacks during dinner and be forced to spend the rest of the evening 
in the men’s restroom. He did not want to have to explain the problem to all of 
Mary’s friends. In an attempt to prevent such an attack, he had taken antispas- 
modic medication for his stomach and was eating sparingly. Just as everyone 
else had finished eating dessert, Dennis began to experience a choking sensation 
in his throat and chest. He could not get his breath, and it seemed certain to him 
that he was going to faint on the spot. Unable to speak or move, he remained 
frozen in his seat in utter terror. The others quickly realized that something was 
wrong, and assuming that he had choked on some food, Mary began to pound on 
his back between the shoulder blades. There was now a sharp pain in his chest, 
and he began to experience heart palpitations. Dennis was finally able to wheeze 
that he thought he was having a heart attack. Two of the other men helped him 
up, and a waiter directed them to a lounge in the building where he was able to 
lie down. In less than 30 minutes, all of the symptoms had passed. Dennis and 
Mary excused themselves from the others and drove home. 

Dennis was frightened by this experience, but he did not seek medical 
advice. He was convinced that he was in good physical condition and attributed 
the attack to something he had eaten or perhaps to an interaction between the 
food and medication. He did, however, become even more reluctant to go to res¬ 
taurants with Mary and her friends. Interestingly, he continued to eat business 
lunches with his own colleagues without apparent discomfort. 

The second panic attack occurred about 6 months later, while Dennis was 
driving alone in rush-hour traffic. The symptoms were essentially the same: the 
sudden sensation of smothering, accompanied by an inexplicable, intense fear. 
Fortunately, Dennis was in the right lane of traffic when the sensation began. 
He was able to pull his car off the road and lie on the seat until the experience 
was over. 

By this point, Dennis was convinced that he needed medical help. He made 
an appointment with a specialist in internal medicine who gave him a complete 



22 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


physical examination. There was no evidence of cardiovascular or gastrointesti¬ 
nal pathology. The physician told Dennis that the problem seemed to be with his 
nerves and gave him a prescription for alprazolam (Xanax), a high-potency ben¬ 
zodiazepine often used in treating anxiety disorders and insomnia. Dennis took 2 
milligrams of Xanax three times per day for 4 months. It did help him relax and, in 
combination with his other medication, seemed to improve his gastrointestinal dis¬ 
tress. However, he did not like the side effects (such as drowsiness and lighthead¬ 
edness) or the feeling of being dependent on medication to control his anxiety. He 
saw the latter as a sign of weakness and eventually discontinued taking the Xanax 
(decreasing his daily dosage gradually, as recommended by his physician). 

Mary asked Dennis for a divorce 3 years after they were married (2 years after 
his first panic attack). It came as no surprise to Dennis; their relationship had dete¬ 
riorated considerably. He had become even more reluctant to go out with her in the 
evening and on weekends, insisting that he needed to stay home and rest his nerves. 
He was very apprehensive in crowded public places and also careful about where 
and when he drove his car. He tried to avoid rush-hour traffic. When he did drive in 
heavy traffic, he always stayed in the right lane, even if it was much slower, so that 
he could pull off the road if he had an attack. Long bridges made him extremely 
uncomfortable because they did not afford an opportunity to pull over; he dreaded 
the possibility of being trapped on a bridge during one of his “spells.” 

These fears did not prevent him from doing his work. He continued to force 
himself to meet new people, and he drove long distances every day. The most 
drastic impact was on his social life. These increased restrictions led to greater 
tension between Dennis and Mary. They had both become more and more irrita¬ 
ble and seldom enjoyed being with each other. When she decided that she could 
no longer stand to live with him, he agreed to the divorce. 

After Mary left, Dennis moved to an apartment in which he was still living 
when he entered treatment 5 years later. His chronic anxiety, occasional panic 
attacks, headaches, and gastrointestinal problems persisted relatively unchanged, 
although they varied in severity. He had a number of friends and managed to 
see them fairly frequently. He did, however, avoid situations that involved large 
crowds. He would not, for example, accompany his friends to a professional foot¬ 
ball game, but he did like to play golf, where he could be out in the fresh air with 
very few people and a lot of open space around him. He met Elaine 4 years after 
the divorce. She was slightly older than he and much less active socially than Mary 
had been. They enjoyed spending quiet evenings watching television and occa¬ 
sionally got together with one or two other couples to play cards. Although they 
planned to get married, neither Dennis nor Elaine wanted to rush into anything. 

Conceptualization and Treatment 


When Dennis entered treatment, he expressed a desire to learn how to control 
his anxiety, particularly when it reached its most excessive proportions in the 




Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 23 


form of panic attacks. He did not feel comfortable taking medication because he 
considered it to be an artificial “crutch.” He had read about cognitive-behavioral 
approaches to the treatment of anxiety and was looking for a psychologist with 
whom he could follow such an approach. He had, in fact, found such a person. 

The difficulties that Dennis had experienced over the past several years 
included a complex blend of generalized anxiety and occasional panic attacks. 
His therapist viewed Dennis’s problems as being the result of an interaction 
between vulnerability to stress and various cognitive and behavioral responses 
that exacerbate and maintain high levels of anxiety. Like many other patients 
with panic disorder, Dennis had experienced his first panic attack during an 
event that he perceived to be very stressful (the dinner with his wife’s boss). 
After that traumatic experience, he became increasingly afraid of (and tried to 
avoid) situations in which he might have another attack. This avoidance was 
maintained, in part, by distorted and unrealistic things that he said to himself 
about future events and his interactions with other people. For example, Dennis 
believed that it would be a catastrophe if someone did not like him. He also 
insisted to himself that he had to be the best salesperson in this firm, and, if 
he was not, then he would be a failure. These maladaptive attitudes had most 
likely been instilled in Dennis by his father, who had continually emphasized his 
demand for perfection and whose affection seemed to hinge on its attainment. 
More useful self-statements would have to be substituted for these maladaptive 
demands before Dennis would feel more comfortable in social situations, par¬ 
ticularly those that involved his work. 

The therapist agreed to help Dennis reduce his generalized anxiety as well 
as to help him eliminate panic attacks. In Dennis’s case, this was particularly 
important because his panic attacks were relatively infrequent. The reduction 
in generalized anxiety would be accomplished by teaching him more appropri¬ 
ate ways of coping with, and thinking about, his environment. Treatment would 
include applied relaxation training and cognitive restructuring. After these skills 
were learned, therapy sessions would turn to situational exposure aimed at 
decreasing Dennis’s avoidance of situations in which he feared having another 
panic attack. The process of discussing this conception of the problem and arriv¬ 
ing at a treatment plan was accompanied by an obvious change in Dennis’s 
behavior toward the therapist. He became much less defensive and dropped his 
annoying, superficial displays of bravado when he realized that the psychologist 
intended to function as a teacher, not as a judge who would rule on his sanity. 

The therapist decided to begin treatment with training in relaxation. Her 
purpose at the outset was not to eliminate the occurrence of any more panic 
attacks. They were, of course, the most dramatic and perhaps the most diffi¬ 
cult of Dennis’s problems. But their infrequency also meant that even if Dennis 
learned to control them, he would not be able to notice any improvement in his 
adjustment for a long time. Therefore, the therapist’s first goal was to select a 
simpler problem and an area in which Dennis could see rapid improvement, thus 
enhancing his motivation for further change efforts. The most suitable place to 



24 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


begin, therefore, was his inability to relax when he returned to his apartment 
after work. 

Relaxation training was introduced to Dennis as an active coping skill that 
he could use to control muscular tension. The therapist explained that she would 
begin by teaching Dennis how to use the procedure in the clinic setting. Dennis 
would be expected to practice relaxation at home on a daily basis for several 
weeks. He was cautioned against expecting a sudden change in his anxiety level 
and was told that, for most people, the development of relaxation skills takes 
considerable effort. 

Relaxation training began during the sixth treatment session. The therapist 
asked Dennis to stretch out in a comfortable reclining chair and then demon¬ 
strated the procedure, which involved the alternate tensing and relaxing of a 
sequence of muscle groups. The therapist drew Dennis’s attention to his pattern 
of breathing and asked him to take deep, slow breaths. When Dennis was com¬ 
fortable, the therapist asked him to lift his forearms off the arms of the chair 
and tighten his hands into fists. He was instructed to hold that position for five 
seconds, noting the muscle tension, and then let go. This cycle was repeated 
through a sequence of several other groups of muscles. Throughout this process, 
the therapist reminded Dennis to breathe slowly and deeply. 

Dennis responded positively to relaxation training. He felt awkward and 
self-conscious at the beginning of the procedure but quickly overcame his 
apprehension. Although he did not think that he had reached a state of com¬ 
plete relaxation, he did feel much more relaxed than he had when he arrived 
for the session; he indicated that he was looking forward to practicing the 
procedure during the coming week. The therapist explained a subjective rat¬ 
ing scale that he could use to keep track of his progress. Using a 10-point 
scale, with 1 being complete relaxation (“similar to the quiet, drifting feeling 
that you have before you go to sleep”) and 10 being maximum tension (“like 
you feel when you’ve already had a tough day and a potential client has just 
decided against buying a policy”), Dennis was asked to keep a record of his 
subjective level of tension before and after each practice session. 

Dennis was faithful in completing his homework assignment. His average 
self-rating of tension was about 6 or 7 before practice and 3 or 4 at the end of 
each session. He enjoyed the exercise and was pleased finally to be learning a 
skill to help him cope with his tension. His outlook was clearly hopeful. 

By the end of the first month of training, Dennis was consistently able to 
reduce his subjective tension to a level of 1 or 2 at the end of each practice ses¬ 
sion. His only problem arose in trying to use the procedure during periods of 
very high tension. For example, during the second week of practice, he had 
tried unsuccessfully to use the exercise to eliminate a severe headache that 
had developed in the afternoon and persisted throughout the evening. The therapist 
pointed out that Dennis should not be discouraged because he had not reached a 
stage of proficiency that would allow him to deal with the most serious levels of 
stress. She also noted that the object of relaxation was primarily to teach Dennis to 



Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 25 


be aware of muscular tension before it had progressed to such an advanced level. 
Relaxation could therefore be seen as a kind of preventive procedure, not as a way 
of coping with problems such as headaches after they became severe. 

After Dennis was making satisfactory progress with relaxation, the thera¬ 
pist shifted the focus of their discussions to introduce a process known as cogni¬ 
tive restructuring. She began with the observation that emotions, or feelings, are 
influenced by what people say to themselves. In other words, it is not necessarily 
the objective situation with which we are confronted, but rather what we tell our¬ 
selves about the situation that determines our emotional response. For example, 
a woman who is fearful when speaking in front of a large group of people is 
not in physical danger. It is probably what that woman is telling herself about 
the audience (“They’ll all think I’m stupid,” or “I’m sure none of them will like 
me”) that leads to undue levels of anxiety. The therapist explained the general 
principles behind cognitive restructuring while carefully avoiding specific refer¬ 
ence to Dennis’s own experience. 

After Dennis understood the assumptions behind cognitive restructuring, 
the therapist outlined several cognitive distortions that are associated with severe 
anxiety. One example, called probability overestimation, refers to the tendency 
to overestimate the probability that a negative event will occur. Another form of 
cognitive distortion, called catastrophic thinking, refers to the tendency to exag¬ 
gerate the consequences of negative events. People who engage in this type of 
thinking act as though an imagined event would be completely devastating when, 
in fact, it would be more accurate to say it would be unpleasant but tolerable. 

Dennis was intrigued by these notions and, throughout the discussion, often 
thought of examples of situations in which other people (such as his former 
wife, Mary) seemed to be making themselves unhappy by engaging in cognitive 
distortion. As they talked further, the therapist asked Dennis if he could think 
of examples in which he engaged in this kind of thinking. Initially, this was dif¬ 
ficult. The therapist noted that we are often unaware of the distorted thoughts; 
they have been so deeply instilled and overlearned that they become automatic. 
Confronted with an audience, the person with public-speaking anxiety does 
not actually whisper, “I have to be perfect in everything I do, including pub¬ 
lic speaking, and it is imperative that they all think that I am witty and clever. 
If they don’t, I’m a miserable failure.” The only subjective experience may be 
an immediate sensation of overwhelming fear. Nevertheless, that emotional 
response may be mediated by these self-statements. Furthermore, if that person 
could learn to think in a less distorted fashion (e.g., “I hope that I will do well 
and that many of the people will enjoy my talk, but if they don’t, it’s not the end 
of the world”), anxiety could be controlled. 

These discussions filled the next several sessions. Much of the time was 
spent taking specific experiences that had been anxiety provoking for Dennis 
and analyzing the self-statements that might have accompanied his response. 
Many centered on contacts with clients. The applicability of the cognitive- 
restructuring approach to these situations was particularly evident given the 



26 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


audio recording that he had made to coach himself before appointments. The 
therapist pointed out that Dennis had been on the right track in this attempt to 
cope with his anxiety, but many of the statements created unrealistic expecta¬ 
tions that probably exacerbated his problem. Instead of assuring himself that 
the client would like him because he was the best salesperson in the company, 
Dennis would have been better able to control his anxiety if he had reduced the 
demands that he placed on himself and recognized that the success or failure of 
his career did not depend on the outcome of a single client contact. 

Dennis gradually became proficient in noticing the distorted thoughts that 
led to his anxiety in various situations. At first, he could only dissect these situa¬ 
tions in discussions with his therapist. Together, they challenged his catastrophic 
thoughts and substituted more realistic, evidence-based reasoning. Dennis found 
it helpful to recognize that the impact of negative events (such as being turned 
down by a client) would be manageable and short-lived. The goal, of course, was 
to help him practice this skill until he could employ adaptive self-statements as a 
coping response before and during stressful experiences. To facilitate this proc¬ 
ess and provide for generalization of these new cognitive responses outside of 
the therapy sessions, the therapist asked Dennis to begin a diary. Each night, he 
was to take a few minutes to describe any situation in which he had become par¬ 
ticularly anxious during the day. He was instructed to note distorted thoughts 
that might have been associated with his anxiety as well as complementary self¬ 
statements that would have been more appropriate. After keeping this record for 
4 weeks, Dennis noted that he was beginning to feel less anxious in social situa¬ 
tions and during sales visits. 

The final step in treatment was concerned with Dennis’s avoidance of sit¬ 
uations that had been previously associated with panic attacks. He had not 
experienced an attack in the 3 months since his first visit to the psychologist, 
probably because he had refused to accompany Elaine to any movies, restau¬ 
rants, or department stores. He was now able to achieve a state of relaxation 
quickly and without the aid of the formal tension-relaxation procedure. The ther¬ 
apist therefore decided to begin a program of exposure to feared and avoided 
situations. This would be accomplished in vivo (i.e., in the natural environment) 
by having Dennis purposefully enter situations that had previously led to feel¬ 
ings of apprehension and dread and then remain there until he had successfully 
demonstrated to himself that he would not have a panic attack. At the beginning 
of treatment, this procedure would have been likely to fail because Dennis did 
not believe that he could handle such situations. The therapist noted that he had 
now acquired new skills with which he would be able to cope with whatever 
anxiety, if any, he might experience. 

They intentionally began with a fairly easy situation and arranged for 
Elaine to accompany Dennis. He indicated that her presence would make him 
feel less vulnerable. His assignment for the week was to go to a specific depart¬ 
ment store, during the morning on a weekday when there would not be a large 
crowd present, and spend 15 minutes browsing in the men's department, which 



Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 27 


was located just inside the front entrance. When this task had been successfully 
accomplished, Dennis and the therapist designed a hierarchy of stressful situa¬ 
tions to which he would expose himself in sequence and for increasing amounts 
of time. These began with further simple situations, such as the first one at the 
men’s department, and continued on to those that had previously been most dif¬ 
ficult for him. The latter included activities such as attending a play with Elaine 
and sitting in the middle of a center row (where he did not have easy access to 
an aisle or exit). 

The treatment sessions were terminated after 6 months. Dennis had made 
considerable progress during that time. He had successfully mastered all the sit¬ 
uations in the exposure hierarchy and had not experienced a panic attack since 
the one that provoked his entry into treatment. His general anxiety level was also 
considerably reduced. He continued to experience occasional tension headaches, 
particularly after especially busy days, but they were less frequent (perhaps two 
or three each month) and less severe than they had been in the past. His insom¬ 
nia had disappeared completely. Whenever he did have trouble sleeping, he 
would use the formal tension-relaxation procedure. In this way, he was able to 
eliminate muscular tension and simultaneously distract himself from whatever 
problems he was worrying about. Unfortunately, his gastrointestinal problems 
remained. He still suffered from intermittent constipation and diarrhea and con¬ 
tinued to use medication to relieve these discomforts on an ad hoc basis. 


Discussion 


Disorders in which anxiety is the most prominent symptom are quite common. 
During any given year, 17% of the people in the United States may suffer from 
at least one form of anxiety disorder, although only one out of four of these 
people receive treatment for the problem (Young, Klap, Shoai, & Wells, 2008). 
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR; APA, 
2000) recognizes eight disorders that involve anxiety and avoidance: 

1. Panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia) 

2. Agoraphobia without history of panic disorder 

3. Specific phobia 

4. Social phobia 

5. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) 

6. Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 

7. Acute stress disorder 

8. Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 

Many people exhibit a mixture of symptoms and meet the criteria for more 
than one disorder (panic disorder and GAD, in Dennis's case). Most individu¬ 
als who meet the diagnostic criteria for GAD also qualify for a diagnosis of at 
least one other type of anxiety disorder or major depression (Moffitt et ah, 2007; 




28 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Turk & Mennin, 2011). The DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) description and organi¬ 
zation of anxiety disorders pay special attention to the presence or absence of 
panic attacks. These extraordinarily frightening experiences, which seldom last 
more than a few minutes, are discrete periods of apprehension or fear, accompa¬ 
nied by sensations such as shortness of breath, palpitations, chest pains, choking 
or smothering sensations, dizziness, perspiring, and trembling or shaking. Some 
patients, like Dennis, experience only one or two attacks a year, whereas others 
may have them on a daily basis. 

The DSM-IV-TR definition of a panic attack includes the following criteria: 
a discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the 
following symptoms develop abruptly and reach a peak within 10 minutes: 

1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate 

2. Sweating 

3 . Trembling or shaking 

4 . Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering 

5. Feeling of choking 

6. Chest pain or discomfort 

7 . Nausea or abdominal distress 

8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint 

9 . Derealization (feeling of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached 

from oneself) 

10 . Fear of losing control or going crazy 

11 . Fear of dying 

12 . Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations) 

13 . Chills or hot flushes 

The DSM-IV-TR criteria for panic disorder require that the person experience 
recurrent, unexpected panic attacks. At least one of these attacks must be fol¬ 
lowed by a period of at least 1 month in which the person has worried about hav¬ 
ing further attacks or else changes his or her behavior as a result of the attacks. 

In phobic disorders, the most important element is a persistent, irrational 
fear of a specific object or situation that the person goes out of his or her way 
to avoid. Agoraphobia is defined as an exaggerated fear of being in situations or 
places from which escape might be difficult, or in which help, if needed, might 
be unavailable. In severe cases of agoraphobia, the person becomes entirely 
housebound—unable to venture outside for fear of experiencing intense anxiety. 
Agoraphobics frequently report fear of becoming physically ill, fainting, having a 
heart attack, or dying, particularly during a panic attack. These fears increase if the 
person’s access to support (e.g., a companion) or an avenue of escape is blocked 
or impaired. Most cases of agoraphobia begin with the experience of panic attacks. 

In contrast to the circumscribed fears seen in phobic disorders, generalized 
anxiety disorder (GAD) is characterized by unrealistic and excessive worry and 
anxiety occurring more days than not for at least 6 months. The person must 
exhibit three or more of the following symptoms in association with these 



Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 29 


worries: restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge, being easily fatigued, hav¬ 
ing difficulty concentrating, irritability, muscle tension, and sleep disturbance. 

Dennis met the criteria for both panic disorder with agoraphobia and GAD. 
Although his panic attacks were not especially frequent, he was persistently 
afraid of having another. His behavior met the criteria for agoraphobia in that he 
was apprehensive about being in public places from which escape might be dif¬ 
ficult. He had occasionally forced himself to enter such situations, but the con¬ 
striction of his social activities had a very negative impact on his life. Dennis’s 
fear was not so severe that he was entirely housebound, but he did avoid public 
places from which he was afraid he might not be able to escape. 

Dennis also met DSM-IV-TR criteria for GAD (APA, 2000). His muscle ten¬ 
sion was clearly evidenced by his inability to relax, his frequent tension head¬ 
aches, and the constant fatigue from which he suffered. His irregular bowel 
movements and diarrhea were further signs of autonomic difficulties. He experi¬ 
enced continual apprehension and frequently had difficulty sleeping. 

Data regarding the frequency of specific anxiety disorders in the commu¬ 
nity have been reported by investigators involved in a large-scale epidemiologi¬ 
cal study, known as the ECA study, concerned with the distribution of mental 
disorders in five American cities (Robins & Regier, 1991). Approximately 6 out 
of every 100 people interviewed in a 12-month period reported some form of 
phobic disorder; some people fit more than one subcategory. Specific phobias 
were the most common (about 5%), followed by agoraphobia (about 3%), and 
social phobias (about 2%). Specific phobias and agoraphobia were more com¬ 
mon among women than men; gender differences are less pronounced for social 
phobias. GAD was also relatively common among people in this study, with 
a 12-month prevalence rate of 4%. Panic disorder, on the other hand, was the 
least common form of anxiety disorder. Slightly more than 1% of the subjects in 
the ECA study qualified for a diagnosis of panic disorder during the 12-month 
period immediately prior to their interview. 

Depression and drug abuse are often associated with anxiety disorders 
(Conway, Compton, Stinson, & Grant, 2006). At least half of all patients with 
an anxiety disorder have also experienced an episode of major depression at 
some point. Alcoholism and barbiturate abuse are common results of attempts 
to use drugs to cope with chronic tension and generalized anxiety. In fact, some 
patients become addicted to minor tranquilizers that have been prescribed by 
physicians. Fortunately, Dennis did not become dependent on the use of medi¬ 
cation. Although Xanax did make him feel more relaxed, he resisted its use 
because it made him feel even less in control of his own emotions. 

When people with panic disorder decide to seek treatment, most begin by 
going to a general medical clinic rather than a mental health facility (Craske et 
al., 2009). They are among the heaviest users of medical care. Dennis became 
convinced that he needed help after having a panic attack while driving in rush- 
hour traffic. Rather than consulting a psychologist or a psychiatrist, he vis¬ 
ited a specialist in internal medicine. This pattern is important for a number 



30 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


of reasons. To avoid the use of inappropriate and expensive medical tests and 
treatments, primary care physicians must be alert to the possibility that many of 
their patients are suffering from mental disorders, especially anxiety and depres¬ 
sion. Identification and effective treatment of problems such as panic disorder 
can simultaneously minimize the distress experienced by patients and reduce the 
overall cost of medical services. 

Unfortunately, it is sometimes difficult to make the distinction between anx¬ 
iety disorders and other medical disorders. Patients with panic disorder experi¬ 
ence a broad range of medical symptoms, including headaches, cardiovascular 
problems, and gastrointestinal difficulties (Eaton et al., 1998). Again, Dennis’s 
experience is consistent with the literature on these points, including his chronic 
gastrointestinal problems. There is a strong connection between panic disorder 
and irritable bowel syndrome, which is the most common type of functional gas¬ 
trointestinal disorder. 

Etiological Considerations 

Several twin studies have found that genetic factors are influential in the trans¬ 
mission of anxiety disorders, especially those that involve the experience of 
panic attacks (e.g., Hettema, Prescott, Myers, Neale, & Kendler, 2005). The data 
indicate that GAD is somewhat less heritable than other forms of anxiety disor¬ 
der. Studies of the distribution of various psychological disorders in families also 
suggest that the etiology of some forms of anxiety and depression may be related. 
First-degree relatives of patients diagnosed as having both major depression and 
panic disorder show markedly increased rates of depression, anxiety disorders, 
and alcoholism in comparison to relatives of normals and those of depressed 
patients without anxiety disorder. Thus, biological factors appear to be important 
in the etiology of anxiety disorders, but environmental events are also influential. 

Traditional psychological views of anxiety have been based on psychoan¬ 
alytic and learning theories. Although there are obvious differences between 
these points of view, both theories treat anxiety as a signal of some expected 
negative event. Neither draws an important distinction between chronic anxi¬ 
ety and panic attacks. A psychoanalytically oriented therapist would have 
viewed Dennis’s chronic anxiety as a symptom of unconscious conflict 
between the ego and previously punished id impulses (Compton, 1992). These 
impulses are usually presumed to be sexual or aggressive in nature and trace¬ 
able to early childhood experiences. It might have been argued, for exam¬ 
ple, that Dennis secretly harbored violent impulses toward his father, who 
criticized and belittled him. Because he was also afraid of his father (a clas¬ 
sic assumption of psychoanalytic theory) and because he would be punished 
if he harmed his father, these impulses were anxiety provoking and therefore 
repressed. But when he entered situations in which he might be evaluated by 
other people, he was reminded of his father’s criticism. The hostile impulses 
then became more intense, and his anxiety would increase proportionately. 



Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 31 


There was, however, no clear evidence to support this notion. Dennis did not 
hide his resentment of his father. They argued openly and frequently about 
every imaginable topic. 

The conditioning model would view Dennis’s problem as a fear response 
that had been learned through the association of previously neutral stimuli (e.g., 
a crowded theater) with a painful or frightening stimulus. After Dennis had 
learned to fear particular situations, his avoidance of them would presumably be 
reinforced by the reduction in anxiety that he experienced after he fled. There 
are a number of problems with this model (see Mineka & Zinbarg, 1995). One is 
that very few patients with anxiety disorders can remember having experienced a 
traumatic event. In Dennis’s case, his first panic attack was certainly a terrifying 
experience, and the fear that he experienced may have become paired with the 
stimuli that were present when it occurred. This process might explain the main¬ 
tenance of his desire to avoid crowded public places, but it does not explain the 
original onset of his intense fear. 

Cognitive perspectives on anxiety disorders emphasize the way in which 
people interpret information from their environment (Roth, Wilhelm, & Pettit, 
2005). Maladaptive emotions such as chronic, generalized anxiety are presuma¬ 
bly products of self-defeating cognitive schemas. Some people make themselves 
unnecessarily anxious by interpreting events in a negative fashion. They view 
the world in a distorted manner that is biased against themselves. The negative 
thoughts and images that are triggered by environmental events lead to persistent 
feelings of threat and insecurity. 

One cognitive theory of panic disorder was proposed by Clark et al. (1997), 
who argued that panic disorder is caused by catastrophic misinterpretation of 
bodily sensations. An anxious mood presumably leads to a variety of bodily sen¬ 
sations that accompany negative emotional reactions (changes in heart and respi¬ 
ration rates, dizziness, and so on). This process is accompanied by a narrowing 
of the person’s attention focus and increased awareness of bodily sensations. 
Next, the person misinterprets the bodily sensation as a catastrophic event. 

Consider how this approach might explain one of Dennis’s panic attacks. 
After he had his first attack, Dennis became highly vigilant, watching for the 
slightest indication that he was having another one. If he became short of breath, 
for whatever reason, he would interpret the experience as being a sign that he was 
about to have another attack. This reaction ensured continued operation of the 
feedback loop, with the misinterpretation enhancing Dennis’s sense of threat and 
so on until the process would spiral out of control. Thus, according to the model 
by Clark et al., (1997) cognitive misinterpretation and biological reactions associ¬ 
ated with the perception of threat are both necessary for a panic attack to occur. 

Treatment 

The therapist who treated Dennis combined the use of relaxation with a cogni¬ 
tive approach to his problems (e.g., Craske et al., 2009; Rodebaugh, Holaway, & 



32 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Heimberg, 2004). She hypothesized that Dennis’s perceptions of social events and 
the things that he said to himself about these events played an important role in 
the maintenance of his anxiety. The therapist helped Dennis recognize the general 
kinds of self-statements that were associated with his anxiety and then modeled 
more appropriate statements that he would be able to use to cope more effectively 
with stressful situations. The latter component of the process is particularly impor¬ 
tant. In addition to helping Dennis gain insight into his problem, the therapist 
taught him specific cognitive skills (adaptive self-statements) that had previously 
been absent from his repertoire of coping responses. If insight had been sufficient, 
Dennis would have experienced a decline in his anxiety level as soon as he recog¬ 
nized that he engaged in distorted thinking, but he did not. Positive change was 
evident only after a prolonged period of practice employing more realistic self¬ 
statements, both in and out of therapy sessions. 

It should also be noted that the therapist did not rely solely on the cogni¬ 
tive form of intervention. In addition to talking with Dennis about his prob¬ 
lem, the therapist helped him learn specific behavioral responses (e.g., applied 
relaxation) and insisted that he confront various situations in the natural envi¬ 
ronment. This approach was founded on the realization that although cognitive 
variables may play an important role in the change process, the most effective 
treatment programs are performance based. This was clear in Dennis’s case. 
His apprehension in crowded public places was not significantly reduced until 
he had actually mastered a series of such situations following the exposure 
procedure. 

One version of cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder includes 
some additional procedures that were not employed in Dennis’s case. Panic con¬ 
trol treatment typically follows a 12-session sequence and incorporates three 
specific methods (Barlow, 1997). First, cognitive restructuring is used to correct 
the person's erroneous appraisals of physical sensations and to reduce the fre¬ 
quency of catastrophic thinking. Second, breathing retraining is used to help the 
person avoid hyperventilation (a common trigger for panic). Third, structured 
exposure to bodily sensations is employed to reduce the person’s sensitivity to 
cues that have come to be associated with panic attacks (e.g., increased heart 
and respiration rates). This is accomplished by having the person participate in a 
series of exercises such as running in place or breathing through a narrow straw. 
If the person has also developed agoraphobic avoidance, in vivo exposure is also 
incorporated into the treatment program. 

Panic disorder can also be treated with various forms of medication. 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which are widely employed in 
the treatment of depression, are also used for the treatment of panic disorder 
(Simon & Pollack, 2000). These drugs include fluoxetine (Prozac) and fluvox- 
amine (Luvox). In comparison to high-potency benzodiazepines such as alpra¬ 
zolam (Xanax), patients are less likely to become addicted to an SSRI, and they 
experience fewer problems when the medication is withdrawn. Tricyclic antide¬ 
pressants, such as imipramine (Tofranil), are also effective in the treatment of 



Chapter 2 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 33 


panic disorder. Patients often prefer the SSRIs because they produce fewer side 
effects than tricyclic antidepressants. 

Anxiety disorders are also treated with minor tranquilizers from the class 
of drugs known as benzodiazepines, which includes alprazolam (Xanax) and 
diazepam (Valium). Dennis had taken Xanax for a few months after his second 
panic attack. The benzodiazepines reduce many symptoms of anxiety, especially 
vigilance and subjective somatic sensations, such as increased muscle tension, 
palpitations, increased perspiration, and gastrointestinal distress. They have 
relatively less effect on the tendency to worry and ruminate. Some psychiatrists 
consider alprazolam to be the drug of choice for patients with panic disorder 
because it leads to more rapid clinical improvement than antidepressant medica¬ 
tion, and it has fewer side effects. Several placebo-controlled outcome studies 
indicate that alprazolam is an effective form of treatment for patients with panic 
disorders (Verster & Volkerts, 2004). 

Of course, some side effects are associated with the use of benzodiazepines. 
These include sedation accompanied by mild psychomotor impairment as 
well as problems in attention and memory. Dennis discontinued taking Xanax 
because he was bothered by these side effects. The most serious adverse effect of 
benzodiazepines is their potential for addiction. Approximately 40% of people 
who use benzodiazepines for 6 months or more will exhibit symptoms of with¬ 
drawal if the medication is discontinued (Shaner, 2000). 

Controlled-outcome studies indicate that cognitive-behavioral procedures and 
medication are effective forms of treatment for the anxiety disorders (Roy-Byme 
et al., 2005). One report compared several forms of intervention for panic-disorder 
patients (Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods, 2000). More than 300 clients were 
randomly assigned to one of five forms of treatment: cognitive-behavior therapy 
(CBT); antidepressant medication (imipramine); CBT plus medication; placebo 
medication; or CBT plus placebo. Clients were treated weekly for 3 months. 
Those who improved during this period were then treated once a month for 
6 more months and followed up 6 months after treatment had been terminated. 
Medication and CBT were both found to be superior to placebo by the end of 
treatment. Panic attacks were significantly reduced in both groups. There were 
no significant differences between CBT alone and medication alone, although 
more patients dropped out of the medication group because of unpleasant side 
effects. Overall, the results of this study suggest that cognitive-behavioral pro¬ 
cedures and antidepressant medication are effective forms of intervention for 
patients with panic disorders. 


Discussion Questions 


1. Dennis met the diagnostic criteria for both panic disorder and GAD. Did he, 
in fact, suffer from two separate disorders? What does your answer say about 
the issue of comorbidity in the current classification system? 




34 


Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


2. What is the difference between the anxiety experienced by a person who is 
having a panic attack and the anxiety of a person who engages in excessive 
worrying? Consider the intensity of the anxiety, its duration, and its focus. 

3. During his first few meetings with his therapist, Dennis was self-conscious 
and defensive. How could his behavior have interfered with the development 
of the therapeutic relationship and with the initial assessment of his prob¬ 
lems? What skills did the therapist need to use to avoid potential problems? 

4 . Should a therapist actively encourage a patient to take medication that has 
been shown to be effective, even if the patient has strong objections to the use 
of a pharmacological approach to treatment? 



CHAPTER 3 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: 
Rape Trauma 


Jocelyn Rowley, a 20-year-old single woman, was a sophomore at a midwest- 
ern university. She had always been a good student, but her grades had fallen 
recently, and she was having trouble studying. Her academic difficulties, cou¬ 
pled with some problems with relationships and with sleeping, had finally led 
Jocelyn to see a therapist for the first time. Although she was afraid of being 
alone, she had no interest in her current friends or boyfriend. She told the thera¬ 
pist that when she was doing everyday things like reading a book, she sometimes 
was overcome by vivid images of violent events in which she was the victim of a 
mugging or an assault. These symptoms had begun rather suddenly, and together 
they made her afraid that she was losing her mind. 

Most of Jocelyn’s symptoms had begun about two months before she vis¬ 
ited the university’s counseling service. Since then, she had been having night¬ 
mares almost every night about unfamiliar men in dark clothing trying to harm 
her. She was not having trouble falling asleep, but she was trying to stay awake 
to avoid the nightmares. During the day, if someone walked up behind her and 
tapped her unexpectedly on the shoulder, she would be extremely startled, to the 
point that her friends became offended by her reactions. When she was studying, 
especially if she was reading her English textbook, images of physical brutality 
would intrude on her thoughts and distract her. She had a great deal of difficulty 
concentrating on her schoolwork. 

Jocelyn also reported problems with interpersonal relationships. She and 
her boyfriend had argued frequently in recent weeks, even though she could not 
identify any specific problems in their relationship. “I just get so angry at him,” 
she told the therapist. Her boyfriend had complained that she was not emotion¬ 
ally invested in the relationship. He had also accused her of cheating on him, 
which she denied. These problems were understandably causing her boyfriend 
to distance himself from her. Unfortunately, his reaction made Jocelyn feel 
abandoned. 


35 



36 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Jocelyn was afraid to walk alone to the library at night. She could not bring 
herself to ask anyone to walk with her because she didn’t know if she could feel 
safe with anyone. Her inability to study in the library intensified her academic prob¬ 
lems. Jocelyn’s roommates had begun to complain that she was unusually sensitive 
to their teasing. They noticed that she cried frequently and at unexpected times. 

In the course of the first few therapy sessions, the psychologist asked a 
number of questions about Jocelyn’s life just prior to entering therapy. Because 
the symptoms had such a rapid onset, the therapist was looking for a specific 
stressful event that might have caused her symptoms. During these first few ses¬ 
sions, Jocelyn reported that she had begun to feel more and more dissociated 
from herself. She would catch a glimpse of herself in the mirror and think, “Is 
that me?” She would walk around in the winter weather with no gloves on and 
be relieved when her hands hurt from the cold, because “at least it’s an indica¬ 
tion that I'm alive.” 

After several sessions, Jocelyn mentioned to her therapist that she had 
been raped by the teaching assistant in her English literature course. The rape 
occurred 2 months before she entered therapy. Jocelyn seemed surprised when 
the therapist was interested in the event, saying “Oh, well, that’s already taken 
care of. It didn’t really affect me much at all.” The therapist explained that seri¬ 
ous trauma such as rape is rarely resolved by itself, and especially not quickly. 
When it became apparent that Jocelyn had not previously reported the rape to 
anyone else, her therapist strongly advised her to contact the police. She refused, 
citing a number of reasons, ranging from her conviction that no one would 
believe her (especially 2 months after the incident) to the fear of facing cross- 
examination and further humiliation. Without Jocelyn’s consent, the therapist 
could not report the rape because the information she had obtained from Jocelyn 
was protected by confidentiality (the ethical obligation not to reveal private com¬ 
munications, in this case, between psychologist and client). There are some rare 
exceptions to this ethical principle. State laws require mental-health profession¬ 
als to break confidentiality and report cases of child abuse. Psychologists are 
also required to report clients who are imminently dangerous to themselves or 
others. These exceptions did not apply to Jocelyn’s situation. 

Jocelyn gradually revealed the story of the rape over the next few sessions. 
She had needed help writing an English paper, and her T.A. had invited her to 
his house one night so that he could tutor her. When she arrived at the house, 
which he shared with several male graduate students, he was busy working. He 
left her alone in his room to study her English textbook. When he returned, he 
approached her from behind while she was reading and grabbed her. The T.A. 
forced her onto his bed and raped her. Jocelyn said that she had not struggled or 
fought physically because she was terrified and stunned at what was happening 
to her. She had protested verbally, saying, “No!” and, “Don’t do this to me!” 
several times, but he ignored her earnest objections. She had been afraid to yell 
loudly because there were only other men in the house, and she was not sure 
whether or not they would help her. 



Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 37 


After the rape, the T.A. walked Jocelyn back to her dorm and warned her 
not to tell anyone. She agreed at the time, thinking that if she never told any¬ 
one what had happened, she could effectively erase the event and prevent it 
from having a negative effect on her life. She went up to her dorm room and 
took an hour-long hot shower, trying to scrub away the effects of the rape. 
While describing these events to the therapist, Jocelyn shook and her voice was 
breathy. She kept saying, “You believe me, don't you?” 

For several days after the rape occurred, Jocelyn believed that she had been 
able to keep it from affecting her everyday life. The more she tried not to think 
about it, however, the more times it came to mind. She began to feel stupid and 
guilty for having gone to a T.A.’s house in the first place, and because she had 
not been able to anticipate the rape, Jocelyn wondered whether her own behavior 
had contributed to the rape: Had she dressed in some way or said something that 
indicated a sexual invitation to him? She was ashamed that she was not strong 
enough to have prevented the rape or its negative consequences. 

Jocelyn had initially believed that only one aspect of her life changed after 
the rape; she no longer attended discussion sections for her English course. 
Unfortunately, several other problems soon became evident. Her exaggerated 
startle response became more and more of a problem because her friends were 
puzzled by her intense reactions to their casual, friendly gestures. Frequent 
nightmares prevented her from getting any real sleep, and she was having trou¬ 
ble functioning academically. She had no further contact with her T.A. unless 
she saw him while walking across campus. When that happened, she would duck 
into a doorway to avoid him. She also began to withdraw from relationships with 
other people, especially her boyfriend. He responded to this retreat by pressuring 
her sexually. She no longer had any interest in sex and repeatedly rejected his 
physical advances. All these problems finally made Jocelyn believe that she was 
losing control of her feelings, and she decided to seek professional help. 


Social History 


Jocelyn had grown up in a small midwestern town 100 miles away from the uni¬ 
versity. She was the oldest of three children. Both of her parents were successful 
in their professional occupations, and they were involved in the community and 
their children’s schools. Jocelyn had attended public schools and was mostly an 
A student. She was involved in several extracurricular activities. In high school, 
she had some trouble making friends, both because she was shy and because it 
was considered “nerdy” to be an A student. It wasn’t until she enrolled at the 
university that she was able to form a relatively large peer group. 

Jocelyn’s parents were strict about dating and curfews. She had not been 
interested in attending large parties or drinking when she was in high school. 
She did have a boyfriend during her junior and senior years. They began dat¬ 
ing when they were both 16 years old and became sexually involved a year 




38 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


later. That relationship had ended when they left their hometown to attend dif¬ 
ferent colleges. 

Jocelyn recalled that her high school boyfriend had occasionally pressured 
her into having sex when she thought it was too risky or when she was not inter¬ 
ested. She denied having previously been a victim of sexual assault, although 
one incident she described did sound abusive to the therapist. When she was 
about 13 years old, Jocelyn went to a summer music camp to play the trombone, 
an instrument not usually played by a female. One day after rehearsal, the boys 
in her section ganged up on her, teasing her that “girls can’t play trombones!” 
One boy began to wrestle with her and, in the melee, placed a finger inside her 
shorts into her vagina. Jocelyn remembered yelling at him. The boy let her go, 
and then all the boys ran away. Jocelyn had never viewed that event as being 
assaultive until she thought about it in reference to being raped. 

Jocelyn’s adjustment to college had been good; she made several friends, 
and most of her grades were good. She had never before sought psychological 
help. Jocelyn felt as if she had the world under control until she was raped by 
someone she knew. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


As Jocelyn began to address her anxiety symptoms, additional problems were 
caused by other people’s reactions to the account of her rape. These difficulties 
kept the focus of treatment away from her primary anxiety symptoms. After tell¬ 
ing her psychologist that she had been raped, Jocelyn began to tell other peo¬ 
ple in her life, including her boyfriend and her roommates. Her roommates 
were understandably frightened by what had happened to her, and they tried to 
divorce themselves from the possibility that it might happen to them. They did 
this by either accusing her of lying or pointing out differences between them: 
“I never would have gone to a T.A.’s house,” or, “You’ve slept with more peo¬ 
ple than me; he must have sensed that,” or, “You didn't look beat up; you must 
not have fought back hard enough.” The absence of meaningful support from her 
friends fueled Jocelyn’s progressive withdrawal. Her anxiety symptoms became 
more pronounced, and she also became depressed. 

Her boyfriend’s unfortunate and self-centered reaction to the description 
of her rape quickly led to the end of their relationship. He sought help to cope 
with his own feelings about her rape by talking to some mutual friends. Jocelyn 
had specifically asked him not to discuss the attack with other people she knew. 
Jocelyn’s general feelings of being out of control of her life were exacerbated 
by her apparent inability to contain the spread of gossip about her assault. One 
specific event, which would have been trivial under ordinary circumstances, 
led to a series of heated exchanges between Jocelyn and her boyfriend. He 
approached her from behind and playfully put his arms around her. When she 
jumped and screamed in fright, he tightened his grip, preventing her escape. 




Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 39 


After arguing about this incident a number of times, they decided not to see each 
other anymore. 

Jocelyn finally approached her English professor and told her that she had 
been sexually assaulted by the T.A. The professor’s reaction progressed from 
shock to outrage. She recommended that Jocelyn report the attack to the appro¬ 
priate campus office. Unfortunately, Jocelyn still refused. She was not ready to 
report her attacker to the university or to press legal charges, in part because she 
felt that she could not bear being in the same room with him for any reason. 
The professor did assign Jocelyn to a different T.A. so that she could continue 
to go to discussions for the class. She also told Jocelyn that she was uncom¬ 
fortable letting the matter drop. She asked whether Jocelyn would mind if she 
discussed the situation with the dean and with campus police. Jocelyn agreed 
reluctantly, only after the professor promised not to use Jocelyn’s name in any of 
these conversations. 

Treatment during this time focused primarily on giving Jocelyn an oppor¬ 
tunity to express her considerable anger and frustration about her situation. 
Jocelyn frequently railed to her therapist against the unfairness of the situation. 
For example, to deal with her fear of walking alone after dark, she was trying 
to find someone to walk with her. It seemed bitterly ironic, however, that she 
wanted a friend to protect her from violence from strangers. It was, after all, 
someone she knew rather well who had raped her. 

Jocelyn also felt a great deal of guilt over not having been able to prevent 
her assault. Perhaps she hadn’t fought hard enough. Maybe she had unknowingly 
flirted with him. Did he assume that she knew he was inviting her to his house for 
sex? Was she a fool for not having recognized that implicit invitation? She also 
felt guilty about the effect of her situation on her boyfriend and roommates. Was 
she responsible for the fact that she had made them fearful and resentful? 

In one session, the therapist pointed out that the intrusive images that 
Jocelyn now experienced while reading her English textbook might result from 
the fact that she had been reading that textbook when her attacker grabbed her 
from behind. Jocelyn was relieved to hear this explanation because she had wor¬ 
ried that she really was going crazy. This insight did not immediately diminish 
the frequency of her intrusive images, however, and she remained frustrated and 
depressed. 

By this time, Jocelyn’s nightmares had become increasingly severe. The 
content of her dreams was more and more obviously rape related. The dream 
would begin with Jocelyn in a crowded parking lot. Then a shadowy male in 
dark clothing would approach her, tell her he wanted to rape her, and proceed 
to attack her. She remembered trying to fight off the attack in her dream, but 
her limbs felt as if they were in thick glue and her struggles were ineffective. 
The other people in the parking lot stood watching, clapping and cheering for 
her assailant. Jocelyn would wake up in the middle of the room, crouched as if 
awaiting attack. These experiences terrified Jocelyn, and they also frightened her 
roommates. 



40 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


The therapist’s treatment strategy moved to a focused, cognitive-behavioral 
intervention that had two main parts. The first part was to address the cognitive 
processes that prolong a maladaptive view of traumatic events. Specific proce¬ 
dures included self-monitoring of activities, graded task assignments (such as 
going out alone), and modification of maladaptive thoughts regarding the event 
(such as guilt and self-blame) (Yadin & Foa, 2007). This part of the treatment 
procedure had actually begun as soon as Jocelyn entered therapy. It was contin¬ 
ued in parallel with the second part of the therapy, which is based on prolonged 
exposure. 

In prolonged exposure, the victim reexperiences the original trauma in a 
safe situation to decrease slowly the emotional intensity associated with mem¬ 
ory of the event. This step is based on the notion that repeated presentation of 
an aversive stimulus will lead to habituation (defined as the process by which 
a person’s response to the same stimulus lessens with repeated presentations). 
Jocelyn had, of course, experienced many fleeting and terrifying images of 
the rape during the weeks after it happened. This form of “reliving” the trau¬ 
matic experience is symptomatic of the disorder. It presumably does not lead to 
improvement in the person’s condition because the experiences are too intensely 
frightening and too short-lived to allow negative emotions to be processed com¬ 
pletely. In the therapy, Jocelyn was asked to relive the rape scene in her imagi¬ 
nation. She described it aloud to the therapist in the present tense. The therapist 
helped Jocelyn repeat this sequence many times during each session. The ses¬ 
sions were recorded on audiotape, and Jocelyn was required to listen to the tape 
at least once every day. 

As the end of the semester approached, Jocelyn was able to resume her 
studies. This was an important sign of improvement. Flunking out of school 
would have been the ultimate proof that the rape had permanently affected her 
life, and she struggled not to let that happen. She ended the semester by passing 
three of her four classes, including English. Therapy was terminated somewhat 
prematurely after 16 sessions (twice weekly for 8 weeks) because the semes¬ 
ter was ending, and Jocelyn was going home for the summer. The psychologist 
could not convince her to continue therapy during the summer, although she still 
suffered from occasional nightmares and other symptoms. Jocelyn refused to see 
a therapist in the summer because she would have to tell her parents, and she 
was not ready to do that. 

A follow-up call to Jocelyn when she returned the following spring, after 
having taken a semester off, revealed that Jocelyn had finally told her parents 
about the rape. They were much more supportive than Jocelyn had anticipated. 
She had continued treatment with another therapist, and her symptoms had 
diminished slowly over time. She now had nightmares only on rare occasions, 
and they were usually triggered by a specific event, such as viewing a sexually 
violent movie or when someone physically restrained her in a joking manner. 
Jocelyn decided not to return to therapy at the university’s counseling service, 



Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 41 


saying that she was tired of being preoccupied by the rape. She believed that it 
was time for her to concentrate on her studies. 


Ten-Year Follow-Up 


Jocelyn performed well in school and on the job in the years following her 
rape. She completed college and then earned her master’s degree in library sci¬ 
ence. She enjoyed her work as a librarian at a small college in her hometown. 
Her social life recovered more slowly. Jocelyn experienced residual symptoms 
of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) intermittently for several years. She 
no longer met the formal diagnostic criteria for PTSD, however, because her 
symptoms were not sufficiently frequent or severe. In the following pages, we 
describe her experiences during this time. 

Jocelyn still suffered from occasional nightmares if she watched a movie or 
a TV show with a scene containing sexual violence. Rape scenes did not have 
to be overtly graphic to cause a nightmare. In fact, scenes in which a rape was 
alluded to rather than depicted on screen were just as disturbing to Jocelyn. She 
tried to avoid movies or TV shows with sexual violence. This decision might be 
interpreted as avoiding stimuli associated with her rape trauma (a symptom of 
PTSD). Her avoidance was also the product of Jocelyn’s conscious decision not 
to support the segment of the entertainment industry that profits from depicting 
such scenes. 

Other examples of lingering mild PTSD symptoms included hypervigi¬ 
lance and increased startle response. Jocelyn was hypervigilant in situations that 
might present a threat to her own safety. For example, when speaking with a 
male colleague in his office, she was often concerned about the distance to the 
door and the proximity of assistance if she called for it. Of course, we all protect 
ourselves by being cautious and alert. But Jocelyn found herself worrying too 
much about potential threats when none existed. This hypervigilance occasion¬ 
ally intruded on Jocelyn’s professional career. It could make her appear unneces¬ 
sarily suspicious and aloof to her coworkers, especially the men. Jocelyn also 
continued to be jumpy if someone touched her from behind, though the degree 
of her startle response had diminished greatly since college. 

The residual effects of the rape trauma could also be seen in the way that 
Jocelyn struggled to control her temper, which had become volatile. When pro¬ 
voked, the intensity of her subjective response was often out of proportion to 
the situation. Events that would annoy or irritate most people (such as being treated 
rudely by a boss) would cause her to become enraged. Because she knew that 
the intensity of her anger was often inappropriate, she almost always suppressed 
it. Jocelyn was afraid of what might happen if she acted on her feelings. 
Suppressing her anger interfered with her ability to have discussions or argu¬ 
ments with other people. If Jocelyn was involved in a discussion, she would 




42 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


often concede a point with which she disagreed to avoid “blowing up.” She 
became unnecessarily timid about stating her opinions. 

Jocelyn’s relationships with men were also affected by the lingering impact 
of her rape. For a period of time in her early 20s (immediately following the 
rape), Jocelyn avoided intimate contact with men entirely. She referred to 
this time as her “celibacy” years. Jocelyn avoided intimacy with men to sort 
through her own feelings about herself, her remaining guilt surrounding her 
rape, and her feelings about men. Several young men found her attractive dur¬ 
ing this time (perhaps because she was uninterested in them), but she rejected 
their overtures. Jocelyn’s parents and friends were afraid that surviving the rape 
had “turned her into a lesbian” because she was not interested in dating men. 
Perhaps in rebellion against her parents’ concerns, Jocelyn joined a women’s 
poetry cooperative and a women’s music group that included women of all 
sexual orientations. She found this community to be warm and supportive. She 
made several close female friends, but she never felt any sexual attraction to 
them. This was a difficult time in which Jocelyn forged new friendships and 
also reestablished relationships with her previous social support network when¬ 
ever possible. 

When Jocelyn eventually began dating again, she seemed to choose rela¬ 
tionships that allowed her to avoid emotional intimacy. She pursued men who 
were inappropriate for her (such as someone who lived a thousand miles away, 
or someone who was already married). Her affairs were brief and even excit¬ 
ing, but they did not result in significant, long-term relationships. At times, she 
could not imagine having a meaningful emotional relationship with a partner. 
Establishing clear consent to have intercourse prior to engaging in any type of 
sexual foreplay was of ultimate importance to her. Therefore, her sexual rela¬ 
tionships tended to be “all or nothing”; she either had intercourse with the man 
she was dating or did not share any physical intimacy at all. Jocelyn realized 
later that she probably conducted her relationships in this fashion so that deci¬ 
sions of consent were as unambiguous and unemotional as possible. 

Recognition of these ongoing difficulties led Jocelyn to decide to go back 
into therapy with a local psychologist. She had just met a new boyfriend and 
seemed to sense something special about this relationship from the beginning. 
Jocelyn wanted to work on issues involving intimacy, trust, and sexuality, in the 
hope that progress in these areas would help her forge a better relationship with 
her new boyfriend (who did eventually become her husband). 

During this therapy, Jocelyn acknowledged that she felt very close to her 
boyfriend, but she had a great deal of difficulty learning to trust him. She found 
it hard to believe him when he said that he loved her. They were also having 
some trouble in their sexual relationship. Many forms of touching, if the touch 
was not gentle enough, were upsetting to Jocelyn. If her partner accidentally did 
anything that caused her discomfort during physical intimacy, Jocelyn would 
think to herself: “This is it. He’s been good until now, but now he’s going to hurt 
me.” Because of these irrational thoughts, Jocelyn frequently interrupted sexual 



Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 43 


contact with her boyfriend abruptly. He found these reactions confusing, and 
their relationship was becoming strained. 

Jocelyn’s therapist used cognitive therapy to address these problems. Her 
goal was to eliminate the systematic biases in thinking that were responsible for 
Jocelyn’s maladaptive feelings and behavior. She treated Jocelyn’s distorted pat¬ 
terns of thinking and her biased conclusions as being testable hypotheses. She 
used their therapy sessions as an opportunity to identify, test, and challenge these 
hypotheses. Several strategies were employed. Her distorted thoughts were either 
decatastrophized (developing what-if strategies to deal with feared consequences), 
reattributed (considering alternative causes of events), or redefined (changing 
the perspective of the problem so that the person feels some control over it). For 
example, Jocelyn’s reactions to painful stimuli during physical intimacy with her 
boyfriend were reattributed (Could your discomfort be the result of something 
other than his desire to hurt you?). Her fears during normal verbal arguments with 
men were decatastrophized (What is the worst thing that could really happen?). 

Therapy also included some elements of anger-management training 
(Novaco & Taylor, 2006). In the initial phase of this process, Jocelyn learned 
to monitor her own anger and the situations that triggered it. Applied relaxation 
was employed to help her learn to regulate arousal in situations that were poten¬ 
tially provocative. The same cognitive-restructuring procedures that had been 
used to address her anxiety and fear were now used to help her modify distorted 
thoughts and misinterpretations of events that sometimes led to inappropri¬ 
ate anger. Finally, the therapist helped her to rehearse assertive communication 
skills that would allow Jocelyn to express herself clearly in situations that had 
previously led to withdrawal or the suppression of her true feelings. 

Cognitive therapy and anger-management training helped Jocelyn improve 
her communication skills with others, including her boyfriend, as well as people 
at work. Her mood was more stable, and she felt better about herself. She also 
developed a deeper, more meaningful relationship with her boyfriend. They were 
married soon after the therapy was completed. 

The fact that Jocelyn’s PTSD symptoms persisted for several years after the 
rape may seem discouraging. Nevertheless, beyond her subtle relationship prob¬ 
lems, the long-term impact of the rape was not devastating. Jocelyn was able 
to complete school, have a successful career, regain closeness with family and 
friends, and (with a little additional help in therapy) form an intimate and lasting 
relationship with a loving partner. She occasionally mourns the loss of her 20s 
because her relationships were so chaotic, but she also has many important plans 
and hopes for the future. 


Discussion 


Rape is an alarmingly frequent problem on college campuses and in other areas 
of our society (Elliott, Mok, & Briere, 2004). Consider, for example, the results 




44 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


of the National Health and Social Life Survey, the hist large-scale examina¬ 
tion of sexual behavior in the United States since the Kinsey reports (Laumann, 
Gagnon, Michael, & Michaels, 1994). In this national probability sample of 
women between the ages of 18 and 59, 22% reported that they had been forced 
by a man to do something sexually that they did not want to do. Only 4% of 
these coercive sexual acts were committed by a stranger. 

Unfortunately, most rapes are never reported. On college campuses, less 
than 5% of rapes are reported to police (Cole, 2006). Victims like Jocelyn, 
whose immediate reactions to the rape included intense fear, helplessness, avoid¬ 
ance, and emotional detachment, may be particularly unlikely to contact legal 
authorities. 

Should other people have reported Jocelyn’s rape when they heard about 
it? Her therapist was clearly prevented from filing a complaint by the ethi¬ 
cal principle of confidentiality. If her therapist had reported the rape against 
Jocelyn’s objections, the therapist would have violated her trust and seriously 
damaged their therapeutic relationship. Her English professor, on the other 
hand, was not strictly bound by this professional obligation. Policies guiding 
the behavior of faculty members in this circumstance currently vary from one 
university to the next and are the topic of heated debate. Some might argue that 
Jocelyn’s professor should have reported the rapist to police or campus admin¬ 
istrators, even if it meant acting against Jocelyn’s wishes. One justification 
would be to protect other students. Other people might believe that Jocelyn’s 
decision not to report the rape should be respected so that she would not feel 
even more helpless or out of control. Would she be exposed to further danger 
if charges were filed without her knowledge? What would happen if the rap¬ 
ist tried to retaliate, and Jocelyn did not know that he had been confronted by 
authorities? What action could be taken against him without Jocelyn’s direct 
testimony, and how would his right to due process be protected? These are all 
difficult questions. We encourage people to seek advice on these matters from 
local police officials and from sexual assault resource agencies. Just as many 
state laws now require therapists to break confidentiality to warn potential vic¬ 
tims of violence, new regulations may be passed to deal with the plight of rape 
victims and the need to report this heinous crime. 

One frequent outcome of rape is posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
PTSD is included in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(. DSM-IV-TR ; APA, 2000, pp. 467^-68) under the general heading of Anxiety 
Disorders. PTSD is defined by the following criteria: 

1. The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which both of the fol¬ 
lowing were present: 

a. The person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or 
events that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a 
threat to the physical integrity of self or others. 

b. The person’s response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror. 



Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 45 


2. The traumatic event is persistently reexperienced in one (or more) of the 
following ways: 

a. Recurrent and intrusive distressing recollections of the event, including 
images, thoughts, or perceptions 

b. Recurrent distressing dreams of the event 

c. Acting or feeling as if the traumatic event were recurring 

d. Intense psychological distress at exposure to cues that symbolize or 
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event 

e. Physiological reactivity on exposure to cues that symbolize or resemble 
an aspect of the traumatic event 

3. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma and numbing of 
general responsiveness (not present before the trauma), as indicated by three 
(or more) of the following: 

a. Efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or conversation associated with the 
trauma 

b. Efforts to avoid activities, places, or people that arouse recollections of 
the trauma 

c. Inability to recall an important aspect of the trauma 

d. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities 

e. Feeling of detachment or estrangement from others 

f. Restricted range of affect (such as being unable to have loving feelings) 

g. Sense of a foreshortened future (e.g., does not expect to have a career, 
marriage, children, or a normal life span) 

4 . Persistent symptoms of increased arousal (not present before the trauma), as 
indicated by two (or more) of the following: 

a. Difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep 

b. Irritability or outbursts of anger 

c. Difficulty concentrating 

d. Hypervigilance 

e. Exaggerated startle response 

5. Duration of the disturbance is more than 1 month. 

6. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in 
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 

The rape and the fear surrounding it were clearly responsible for provoking 
the symptoms that Jocelyn experienced. One of the key elements of PTSD is the 
recurrence or reexperience of stimuli associated with the event. Jocelyn initially 
experienced this symptom in the form of intrusive, violent images that came to 
mind whenever she opened her English textbook. Her recurrent nightmares were 
another symptom linked to reexperiencing the event. Whenever one of these 
images or dreams occurred, Jocelyn would become extremely fearful and dis¬ 
tract herself (escape) as quickly as possible. This type of reexperiencing of the 
trauma should be distinguished from the procedures used in cognitive-behavioral 
treatment. The latter is designed to ensure prolonged exposure in the context of 



46 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


a safe and supportive environment, which allows the person’s intense emotional 
response to diminish gradually. 

Avoidance of rape-related stimuli has been shown to differentiate rape vic¬ 
tims with PTSD from those rape victims who did not develop PTSD. Jocelyn’s 
avoidance was manifested by withdrawal from her friends, her decision not to 
report the rape, and perhaps her reluctance to return to therapy for several years. 
Her feelings of dissociation, such as asking, “Is that me?” when looking in the 
mirror, were another sign of Jocelyn’s avoidance. 

Jocelyn’s increased arousal was consistent with the DSM-IV-TR (APA, 
2000) description of PTSD. Her exaggerated startle response, irritability in inter¬ 
personal relationships, difficulty studying, and sleep disturbance are all signs of 
the heightened arousal that is associated with this disorder. The length of time 
that had elapsed since the initial appearance of her symptoms and the obvious 
impact that these symptoms had on her adjustment also indicate that Jocelyn met 
the formal diagnostic criteria for PTSD. 

The term posttraumatic stress disorder was introduced to the formal diag¬ 
nostic manual with the publication of DSM-III in 1980 (APA, 1980). The con¬ 
cept of a severe and maladaptive reaction to a traumatic event was recognized 
many years earlier, but it was described in different terms. The disorder had 
been observed among soldiers returning from World War II and was known as 
Traumatic Neurosis of War in DSM-I (APA, 1952). The category was dropped 
in the next edition of the diagnostic manual, DSM-II (APA, 1968), even though 
the phenomenon had been well documented in combat veterans. DSM-III (APA, 
1980) returned the concept to the manual and listed it with other types of anxiety 
disorders. This version of the manual expanded the range of possible stressors 
from a limited focus on combat experiences to the consideration of any trau¬ 
matic event that was “outside the range of usual human experience” (APA, 1980, 
p. 247). In other words, people who had been victims of a crime or survivors of 
a natural disaster might also develop the symptoms of PTSD. 

Following the publication of DSM-III, clinicians reported that many vic¬ 
tims of rape suffered from the symptoms of PTSD. There were problems, 
however, with the way in which the disorder was described in the diagnostic 
manual. For example, epidemiological studies indicated that rape was not “out¬ 
side the range of usual human experience.” Rape is not an uncommon event. 
The DSM-III (APA, 1980) criteria also put the therapist in the difficult position 
of having to make a judgment about the expected or usual impact of an envi¬ 
ronmental event. The authors of DSM-IV (APA, 1994) corrected some of these 
problems when they revised the criteria for PTSD. The traumatic event is now 
described as one in which the person experienced a threat of death or serious 
injury and responded with intense fear. This description clearly includes rape as 
a traumatic event. 

The classification of PTSD has been criticized on a number of grounds 
(McNally, 2003). Some scientists suggest that PTSD may not be a mental dis¬ 
order because it is a reaction to an event that would be distressing for almost 



Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 47 


anyone. Thus, perhaps PTSD should be separated from anxiety disorders and 
placed in an etiologically based category along with other disorders that fol¬ 
low traumatic events. This grouping would include adjustment disorders and 
enduring personality changes that may follow trauma. This approach is cur¬ 
rently used in the International Classification of Diseases (ICD\ World Health 
Organization, 1990). 

Further questions about the classification of PTSD as an anxiety disorder 
involve the nature of its core symptoms (Friedman, 2009; Zohar, Juven-Wetzler, 
Myers, & Fostick, 2008). Some symptoms in PTSD do involve anxiety, such as 
recurrent, intrusive images; avoidance; hypervigilance; and startle responses. 
These are similar to the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 
phobic disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). But PTSD also shares 
many symptoms with dissociative disorders such as amnesia, fugue, and mul¬ 
tiple personality. These include flashbacks, memory impairment, and body dis¬ 
sociation. These classification issues will need to be addressed in future versions 
oftheDSM. 

It is difficult to estimate the true prevalence of PTSD from epidemiologi¬ 
cal studies because the disorder is precipitated by traumatic events (Keane, 
Marshall, & Taft, 2006). These events may be personal, affecting one person at 
a time, as in the case of rape, but they may also be events that affect a large 
number of people simultaneously, as in the case of a hurricane. How many peo¬ 
ple in the general population are exposed to traumatic events that might trigger 
PTSD? The National Comorbidity Study (NCS) found that 60% of men and 
51% of women reported at least one such traumatic event at some time during 
their lives (Kessler et al., 1999). Many of these people had been exposed to more 
than one traumatic event. The most frequently reported traumatic events were 
witnessing someone being badly injured or killed, being involved in a natural 
disaster, being involved in a life-threatening accident, and being the victim of 
an assault or robbery. These alarming numbers indicate that traumatic events are 
unfortunately a relatively common experience in our society. 

The overall rate of PTSD in the general population is higher for women 
(10%) than for men (5%) (Kilpatrick & Acierno, 2003). This pattern may be sur¬ 
prising in light of the fact that men are somewhat more likely to be exposed to 
traumatic events. How can it be explained? The NCS investigators suggest that, 
in comparison to men, women may be more likely to be exposed to traumatic 
events that are psychologically catastrophic. Rape is one example. Women are 
much more likely to be raped than men, and the rate of PTSD (for both male and 
female victims) is much higher following rape than following any other type of 
traumatic event. What are the distinguishing features of rape that account for its 
devastating impact? In comparison to many other traumatic events, rape involves 
directed, focused, intentional harm that is associated with the most intimate 
interpersonal act (Calhoun & Wilson, 2000). 

The prevalence rate for symptoms of PTSD is highest immediately after the 
traumatic event. Most rape victims (95%) show symptoms of PTSD within 1 or 



48 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


2 weeks of the crime (although the person cannot technically meet the DSM- 
IV-TR criteria until after the symptoms have been present for at least 1 month). 
The rate tapers off over time, with 48% of the victims meeting the criteria for 
PTSD 3 months after the rape. For many people, PTSD can become a chronic 
condition (Kuwert et al., 2010). Jocelyn certainly experienced some symptoms 
of PTSD for many years, even though her overall condition had improved, and 
she no longer met the formal criteria for the disorder. 

Etiological Considerations 

Not all victims of trauma develop PTSD. What determines whether or not a vic¬ 
tim will develop PTSD following a traumatic event? There do not appear to be 
systematic differences between crime victims who develop PTSD and those who 
do not in terms of demographic characteristics such as race, employment, educa¬ 
tion, and income. One common line of investigation is whether or not rape vic¬ 
tims who developed PTSD had different premorbid personality characteristics or 
a different pattern of adjustment that may have contributed to developing PTSD. 
Some evidence suggests a relationship between depression prior to the crime, 
the level of stress associated with the crime (e.g., an attack with life threat, 
actual injury, or completed rape), and the probability of developing PTSD. If the 
victim is depressed before the assault, and if the victim is assaulted in a par¬ 
ticularly severe manner, then she is more likely to suffer from PTSD follow¬ 
ing the crime in comparison to victims of lower stress crimes (Bonanno, Galea, 
Bucciarelli, & Vlahov, 2007; Ozer & Weiss, 2004). 

Cognitive factors may also influence whether a rape victim will develop 
PTSD. A perceived life threat may be present even in situations that are not 
overtly violent. In fact, the severity of perceived life threat, rather than actual 
life threat, may be the best predictor of whether a person will develop PTSD 
(Basoglu & Paker, 1995). The person’s beliefs about whether she or he can con¬ 
trol future events are also important. Victims who perceive (perhaps with justi¬ 
fication) that future negative events are uncontrollable are much more likely to 
have severe PTSD symptoms than those victims who perceive some future con¬ 
trol (Basoglu & Mineka, 1992). This indication is particularly important when 
viewed in light of the fact that many women who have been raped report that 
they expect to be raped again. 

Risk for persistent problems following a traumatic event is also increased 
by avoidance of emotional feelings and rumination about the traumatic event. 
Victims who suppress their feelings of anger may have an increased risk of 
developing PTSD after a rape (Foa & Riggs, 1995). Intense anger may interfere 
with the modification of the traumatic memory (to make it more congruent with 
previous feelings of safety). Anger also inhibits fear, so the victim cannot habitu¬ 
ate to the fear response. Jocelyn’s ongoing problems with the experience of 
anger may have helped to prolong her other symptoms of PTSD, such as night¬ 
mares and hyperarousal. 



Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 49 


Protective factors such as the person’s level of social support may help to 
prevent or limit the development of PTSD and other psychological consequences 
of rape (Andrews, Brewin, & Rose, 2003; Keane, Fisher, Krinsley, & Niles, 
1994). Unfortunately, simply having a social support network may not be enough. 
The tendency of the victim to withdraw and avoid situations is an inherent part 
of the disorder. This avoidance may mean that victims do not take advantage of 
social support, even if it is available to them. In Jocelyn’s case, the reactions 
of her friends often led to further problems and made her feel less in control 
and more alienated from other people. This kind of problem may help to explain 
why some studies do not find that social support serves as a protective factor. 

The moderating effects of social support may also be complex. Consider, 
for example, the evidence regarding traumatic stress responses among survivors 
of torture (Ba§oglu et al., 1994). Those victims with extensive social support 
networks were less likely to be anxious or depressed, but social support did not 
specifically reduce the frequency or severity of PTSD symptoms. This pattern 
suggests that the needs of trauma survivors must be addressed broadly. In other 
words, factors that alleviate some of the more general consequences of exposure 
to trauma may not have a direct impact on the more focal symptoms of PTSD, 
such as avoidance and numbing, reexperiencing, and increased arousal. 

Attitudes that society holds toward victims of sexual assault are also impor¬ 
tant in relation to social support (Ullman & Filipas, 2001). Some people appar¬ 
ently believe that certain women somehow deserved to be raped. These women 
undoubtedly receive less social support than other victims. People may also 
be more supportive after hearing the details of an assault that was clearly non- 
consensual—one in which the victim violently fought back when attacked by 
a stranger—than when the circumstances surrounding the assault were more 
ambiguous (the woman’s protests were verbal and not physical). Myths about 
rape, especially about acquaintance rape, may decrease the amount of social 
support received by victims of these crimes. 

Jocelyn’s case also highlights another frequent consequence of rape trauma. 
Many victims develop sexual dysfunctions. These problems include decreased 
motivation for sexual activity, arousal difficulties, and inhibited orgasm (Gillock, 
Zayfert, Hegel, & Ferguson, 2005). Their onset is undoubtedly mediated by a 
complex interaction of emotional responses to the rape, including anxiety, 
depression, and guilt. They can be exacerbated by interpersonal difficulties with, 
and lack of support from, sexual partners, as illustrated by Jocelyn’s boyfriend 
at the time of her rape. Sexual difficulties may be an important consideration in 
planning treatment for some victims of sexual trauma. 

Treatment 

The most effective forms of treatment for PTSD involve the use of either cog¬ 
nitive-behavior therapy or antidepressant medication, alone or in combination 
(Foa, Keane, Friedman, & Cohen, 2009; Forbes et al., 2010). The psychological 



50 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


intervention that has been used and tested most extensively is prolonged expo¬ 
sure. This procedure starts with initial sessions of information gathering. These 
are followed by several sessions devoted to reliving the rape scene in the cli¬ 
ent’s imagination. Clients are instructed to relive the assault by imagining it and 
describing it to the therapist, as many times as possible, during the 60-minute 
sessions. Sessions are recorded, and patients are instructed to listen to the tape at 
least once a day. Patients are also required to participate in situations outside 
the therapy sessions that are deemed to be safe but also elicit fear or avoidance 
responses. An adapted form of this treatment was used in Jocelyn’s therapy. 

Cognitive therapy is another effective psychological approach to the treat¬ 
ment of PTSD. It can be used on its own or in combination with prolonged 
exposure. Perceived threat, more than actual threat, is a better predictor of many 
of the symptoms of PTSD. Cognitive therapy can address maladaptive ways of 
perceiving events in the person’s environment. It can also be used to change 
unrealistic assumptions and beliefs that lead to negative emotions such as guilt. 
For example, in Jocelyn’s case, her therapist might have used cognitive-therapy 
procedures to reduce her feelings of guilt about the assault and its consequences 
(i.e., blaming herself for the rape). Cognitive therapy and prolonged exposure 
are both effective and approximately equal in their effects on reducing symp¬ 
toms of PTSD (Bradley, Greene, Russ, Dutra, & Westen, 2005). 

Various types of antidepressant medication are also effective forms of treat¬ 
ment for PTSD (Osterman, Erdos, Oldham, & Ivkovic, 2011). Carefully control¬ 
led outcome studies indicate that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, such 
as sertraline (Zoloft) and paroxetine (Paxil), lead to a reduction in PTSD symp¬ 
toms for many patients within a period of 6 weeks. In actual practice, cognitive- 
behavior therapy is often combined with the use of medication. 

Final Comments 

We have used the term victim rather than survivor to describe a person who 
experienced a traumatic event. This choice was made primarily because victim 
is the term used in the scientific literature on PTSD. We also want to point out, 
however, that many rape victims prefer to think of themselves as survivors to 
enhance their sense of control over events in their environments. Further infor¬ 
mation and resources are also available in Robin Warshaw’s book, I Never 
Called It Rape (1994). Her descriptions are less technical than this case, and 
they may provide additional sources of support. 

Discussion Questions 


1. Discuss the issues surrounding Jocelyn’s reluctance to report her rape. Should 
her therapist have reported it to the police without her patient's consent? Was 
there a better way for the English professor to handle the situation? 




Chapter 3 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Rape Trauma 51 


2. How did Jocelyn’s friends respond to her problems? Did they help the situa¬ 
tion or make it worse? Is there anything that they could have done that would 
have been more beneficial to her? 

3. Do you think that a person can develop PTSD after witnessing an assault, a 
bad accident, or some other kind of traumatic event (that happened to some¬ 
one else)? Or does PTSD only occur in people who are directly the victims 
of trauma? What kind of evidence would be needed to answer this question 
empirically? 

4 . Do you think that PTSD should be classified as a form of anxiety disorder? 
Should it be included with the dissociative disorders? Why? 



CHAPTER 4 


Hypertension in an African 
American Man 


John Williams had been complaining to his wife of dizziness, fatigue, and occa¬ 
sional light-headedness that almost caused him to faint one day at the water 
cooler in the law office where he worked downtown. His boss had been after him 
for weeks to see a physician, but John had stubbornly refused and felt angry that 
his boss was being condescending. He was frightened, though, because he felt 
something must be wrong. 

His first clear knowledge of having hypertension, or high blood pres¬ 
sure, came during a visit to his dentist. Before taking X-rays, the dental assist¬ 
ant wound a blood pressure cuff around John’s right arm, pumped it full of 
air until the blood stopped flowing, and then slowly released the valve, not¬ 
ing when the first and the last sounds of the pulse could be heard through 
the stethoscope pressed to the vein in his arm beneath the cuff. Alarmed at the 
reading—165/110—she took the pressure reading again after doing the X-rays 
and found it to be almost exactly the same. She tried to smile pleasantly and 
reassuringly, but found this difficult, especially when she noticed John’s worried 
expression. 

He did not ask about the blood pressure reading until he was sitting across 
from the dentist in the consulting room to discuss treatment plans. His dentist 
asked how he had been feeling lately, whether he had been feeling tired, irrita¬ 
ble, or under pressure. John searched his dentist’s face for some hint of what was 
going on, but he already knew that his blood pressure must be much too high. 
Finally, he just asked for the numbers, thanked the dentist, and went home. 

it took him 30 minutes to reach his condominium in the suburbs. As he 
unlocked the door, he wondered how, or whether, he would raise the issue with 
his wife. Although he wasn’t a physician himself, he knew what high blood pres¬ 
sure might mean to a 40-year-old like himself, especially someone who was so 
driven to succeed professionally and financially. Certainly he would have to slow 
down and perhaps also take some medication. But what else, he wondered. 


52 



Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 53 


Social History 


John Williams was the only child of an upper-middle-class African American 
family in Atlanta. His father was a successful attorney, and his mother was a 
high school music teacher. Life was sweet in his childhood, and he had many 
friends. Although he was raised in a segregated city, he seldom felt excluded 
from anything important. John was taught during countless dinnertime con¬ 
versations that there were plenty of opportunities for success; he had superior 
intelligence, an engaging wit, and a degree of ambition that matched that of his 
hardworking father. 

In high school, John excelled at everything he attempted. A straight-A stu¬ 
dent, he was also a varsity athlete in three sports, dated the most popular girls, 
and was senior class president. He graduated from high school during the middle 
1950s, well before the Civil Rights Movement. John wanted to leave Georgia 
for college, and this created anxiety in John’s mother and anticipatory pride in 
his father. Mr. Williams wanted his son to have a college education with “class,” 
as he put it. With the encouragement of his guidance counselor and the urging 
of his father, John applied to several Ivy League schools. He was accepted at 
Harvard University. 

Years later, John’s college roommate. Bill, confided to him that a month 
before school started their freshman year, he had received a letter from the hous¬ 
ing office indicating that he had been assigned to room with a Negro student, but 
only if he had no objection. Bill, a Jew from Brooklyn, New York, was outraged 
at the discrimination and prejudice of this inquiry. They had many discussions 
about the pressures on members of ethnic minority groups who tried to succeed 
in society, especially in the elite circles of a private, selective college. 

One night, a handwritten invitation to join a fraternity was slipped under 
John’s door. Fraternities at Harvard differed from their Greek-letter counterparts 
on other campuses in that they were not residential. All undergraduates were 
affiliated with a house, modeled after the “colleges” of Oxford and Cambridge, 
in which they lived and took all their meals. The fraternities operated outside the 
house system and were by invitation only. Some of them bore names of winged 
and sharp-toothed animals such as bats and wolves, others the more familiar 
Greek initials. John had felt sure that he would be excluded from these clubs, 
although he hated even thinking about it. Thinking implied that he cared, and to 
care about the clubs was to accord them a legitimacy and importance he desper¬ 
ately resisted. As he picked up the engraved envelope, he could feel the blood 
pound in his ears. 

When he looked back on things, this single moment crystallized much of 
the conflict he felt about his blackness in a White world. John knew he and his 
race had come far from the days when a fair-skinned youngster might hope 
to “pass” for White. He had grown up proud of the fact that he was African 
American and felt that whatever barriers there might be in succeeding in a White 




54 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


society could not outweigh his self-respect. But as he lingered over breakfast 
coffee with Bill the morning the invitation arrived, he felt it was strange that 
one of the prestigious clubs wanted him as a member. Bill had an uneasy feeling 
about it all, but he kept it to himself, wondering whether he was just jealous that 
he had not been invited. 

John agonized all day over whether to attend the reception for newly solic¬ 
ited members. He was tempted to call his parents, but what would he tell them, 
and how? Was there something to celebrate? Would his father smile quietly to 
himself as he heard the news, confirming his own good judgment in sending his 
son to one of the bastions of eastern elitism? In the end, John did not call. He 
feared that his father would either congratulate him on the invitation or chide him 
for even considering it. No way to win, he told himself. At some level he knew 
that it was his own conflict he was wrestling with, not his father’s reaction. 

The day of his initiation, John awoke with a screaming headache. He took 
three aspirins—a habit he had gotten into since coming to college—and told 
himself to stop worrying about the party that evening. Perhaps he need not have 
worried. The welcome he received seemed genuine. And yet he could not shake 
the feeling that his new “brothers” were being nicer to him than they were to the 
other initiates, too nice somehow. His wineglass was never empty, always filled 
by a brother who, it struck John, smiled a bit too ingratiatingly. In fact, it seemed 
to him that his new friends must have suffered from aching mouths from the 
broad smiles they wore whenever they talked to him. He tried to reassure him¬ 
self that the cordiality was real, and maybe it was. The problem, he knew, was 
that he did not really know, nor could he devise a practical way to find out. 

His membership in the club turned out to be a boon to his social standing but 
an emotional disaster. Headaches and feelings of pressure in the brain were more 
regularly part of his existence than ever before. He hated himself for even being 
in the club, yet he prided himself on being the only African American member. 
He was furious at the fact that so few Jews were members and was also suspi¬ 
cious that there were no other African Americans, but he found the young men 
in the club congenial and enjoyable to spend time with, and he did experience a 
thrill whenever he donned the club necktie. His friends from the club were cer¬ 
tainly no less bright than his other classmates, no less interested in abstract ideas 
and “deep” conversations over sherry after dinner. But the clubs were by nature 
exclusionary, and John was coming to realize that he might be seen as the quin¬ 
tessential Uncle Tom. He began to think of himself as the “club nigger.” 

His anger at himself and at his brothers grew to an intensity that was 
frightening. To Bill, in whom he confided his doubts, fears, guilt, and rage, 
there seemed to be no way for John to win. To express his concerns to his club 
brothers seemed out of the question. But not to do so, at least to one of them, had 
begun to make the thought of going to the handsome Georgian building for the 
evening a challenge, almost a dare. He dreaded the possibility of someone making 
a racist remark. How should he react? He had learned to let it pass, but the muscle 
tension that mounted in his body told him this was not the best thing for him to 




Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 55 


do. Once a club member used the word niggardly, and he felt himself blush. How 
infantile to react that way, he told himself. And yet, maybe the word was used to 
taunt him. But how inane to think that. Sure, Uncle Tom, he concluded. 

The 4 years of college passed quickly. As his family and friends expected, 
John did very well academically and also earned a varsity letter in baseball. He 
was admitted to a first-rate law school, although John’s problem by this time was 
his uncertainty as to whether he had been admitted solely on his academic mer¬ 
its, or whether the several prestigious schools, like the club, wanted him prima¬ 
rily for his color. And so his internal conflicts continued through law school. By 
this time, they took the form of John’s having to excel to what even his ambi¬ 
tious father regarded to be an unreasonable degree. John just had to prove he was 
good enough, indeed, that he was the best. 

John became engaged to an African American woman from a prominent fam¬ 
ily, but the joys of the relationship were dulled by his relentless drive for excellence 
and perfection. One major change was that his problems with hypertension were 
now impossible to hide. She insisted that he have a complete physical examina¬ 
tion, something he had consciously avoided since entering college. The reading was 
130/85, something the doctor called “high normal,’’ but high enough to cause con¬ 
cern because he was a young man and in very good physical condition. His fiancee 
was convinced that John’s grim pursuit of straight A’s, law review, and all the rest 
were the cause. But she did not know the reasons behind his near-obsessive push. 

John graduated at the top of his law school class. It was now the middle 
1960s, and the developing social turmoil surrounding Vietnam and the Civil Rights 
Movement affected him deeply. On one hand, he felt that he should be out protest¬ 
ing, but his studies and his new job at a top law firm took precedence. He tried to 
assuage his guilt by donating money to civil rights groups, but it did not seem 
to help. He had cast his lot with the White world, he told himself, and his wife and 
his own family back in Atlanta supported that decision. Middle- and upper-middle- 
class professional African Americans had their role to play, his father continually 
reminded him, and who could better play that role than him? The sense he had 
that it was, indeed, a role turned out to be important in the psychotherapy he began 
after the alarmingly high blood pressure reading in the dentist’s office. 

Conceptualization and Treatment 


Choosing a therapist is never easy. For John, it presented special difficulties. 
Though he lived near a large city, there were few African American psychiatrists 
or psychologists. As he had grown accustomed to doing in most other areas of 
his life, John decided to work with a White person, but was uncertain whether he 
could relate openly to a European American. His only really close White friend 
was his old college roommate, Bill, and even then he sometimes held back his 
thoughts and feelings about race. Would this same problem arise in a therapeutic 
relationship? In fact, was race even an issue? 




56 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


“Well, what do you really want out of life?” asked Dr. Shaw, a distinguished 
and experienced clinical psychologist. “The same thing everyone else is after,” 
was his reply. “But what is that?” questioned the psychologist. 

The first couple of sessions were like this: Dr. Shaw trying to get John to 
examine what he really wanted, and John sparring with him, fending off the 
probes with generalities about “all other people.” In Shaw’s mind, John Williams 
did not want to confront the conflicts of playing a role in the White professional 
world. He identified with being African American, Shaw believed, but he sensed 
a falseness about his life. Racial slurs went by without comment. He took pride 
in the fact that his wife wore her hair straight but at the same time castigated 
himself for feeling this way. He hid from his colleagues the fact that he was 
a member of several civil rights groups and that he considered Martin Luther 
King, Jr. to have been too moderate. But what was he doing about it? King and 
others had risked personal safety in freedom marches, but John was terrified of 
being seen in one. What would the people in the firm think of him? Would they 
want a “radical” in the office? 

Dr. Shaw thought to himself during these early sessions that he should pres¬ 
sure his client more and realized he was holding back in a way he would not 
with a White client. Was it his right to suggest to John that he was at the same 
time proud and ashamed of his racial heritage, and that he despised himself for 
hiding his feelings? Indeed, was it his duty? But how could Shaw be certain, 
and wouldn't it be terrible if he suggested something to John that was off base? 
But that, too, was something he worried far less about with his White clients. 
No therapist is infallible, but somehow he believed that with John, he had to be 
more certain about his interpretations. 

Dr. Shaw routinely referred clients with medical or psychophysiological 
problems to an internist. This doctor prescribed some antihypertensive medi¬ 
cation for John to take daily. But the physician also hoped that this relatively 
young patient would not come to rely on the drug. In an extended consultation, 
Shaw and his medical colleague agreed that John's high-pressure lifestyle was 
a major factor in his hypertension. What they could not agree on was what role 
the man’s race played. There was no family history of hypertension; they agreed 
that, for whatever reason, John’s particular response to stress was hypertension, 
more specifically essential hypertension, because a medical evaluation had ruled 
out physical causes. 

A crisis took place in the fifth and final session. For months afterward. Dr. 
Shaw wondered whether he had blundered so badly that his client was driven 
from therapy. 

Dr. Shaw: John, I’ve been wondering about what you’ve told 

me about your college days. 

John (a bit What aspect of them? 

suspiciously): 



Dr. Shaw: 


John (feeling his ears 
becoming warm): 

Dr. Shaw: 

John: 

Dr. Shaw: 

John: 

Dr. Shaw: 

John (definitely on 
edge, wary): 

Dr. Shaw: 


John: 

Dr. Shaw: 

John: 

Dr. Shaw: 


John: 

Dr. Shaw: 

John (suspicion 
mounting, almost 
a feeling of panic 
setting in): 


Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 57 

Well, I guess I was thinking about the club. (Shaw 
noted to himself that he seldom said “I guess” in 
such circumstances. Stop pussyfooting, he told 
himself.) 

Well, what about the club? 

Your feelings of being the only Black. 

Well, I felt really good about it. I used to daydream 
about what my high school friends would think. 
And what would they have thought? 

They’d have envied me to the utmost. I mean, I must 
be doing something right to get into one of the Greeks. 

Yes, I know you were quite proud about it.... But I 
wonder if you had any other feelings about it. 

What do you mean? 

Well, lots of times people are conflicted about things 
that are important to them. Like the nervous bride¬ 
groom on the wedding day. He’s eager for the hon¬ 
eymoon, but he knows he’s giving up something. 
What do you think I was giving up? 

You feel you were giving up something by being in 
the club? 

Come on, Doc, don’t play games. You know damn 
well that you think I gave up something. What did 
I give up? 

John, if anything was given up, it was you who gave 
it up, not I. (That sounded too harsh, he told himself 
immediately, but maybe it was time to apply more 
pressure on him. Otherwise, he might never move.) 

I resent what you’re implying. 

Okay, but can you explore it, just hypothetically? 
Okay, Shaw, let me think of what I gave up. 


At this point there was a lengthy silence. John stared at his feet. Dr. Shaw at his 
notes, occasionally glancing up at John but not wanting to look at him too much. 
John began to dwell on the thoughts he had never shared with anyone, not even 



58 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


with his roommate, Bill. Oreo cookie, he called himself, black on the outside 
and white on the inside. Who needs the damned club? If they were serious about 
being democratic, I would not be the only African American. Just me, and oh, 
that Chinese kid, whose family just happened to own half of Hong Kong. Yeah, 
David and me, the two typical minority members. And they can congratulate 
themselves for being so damned liberal. And I can congratulate myself for mak¬ 
ing it in the door. But how would they have reacted if I had dated a White 
woman? Or worn my hair in an Afro? Or put on a dashiki? Ha! How do you 
wear a club tie with a dashiki? Even the one overt sign of club membership con¬ 
flicts with a dashiki! What am I doing with them? How hypocritical can I be? 1 


Dr. Shaw: 
John: 

Dr. Shaw: 


John, can you share some of your thoughts with me? 
Doc, I can’t do it. You’re one of them. 

One of whom? 


John: 


Dr. Shaw: 


John (interrupting 
the psychologist): 
Dr. Shaw: 


Dr. Shaw: 

John (relieved): 
Dr. Shaw: 

John (knowing he 
would break the 
appointment): 


Doc, I can’t talk to a White man about this. I can’t 
talk to a Black man about this. I’m too ashamed, too 
mixed up (beginning to sob). I can't handle this. 

This is hard for you, 1 know, John. But this is a place 
you can use to look at those feelings. Try to sort them 
out. Try to figure out what you really want— 

No! It’s not for you to tell me what 1 should be doing. 
I’m the one who has to decide, (long silence again) 
John? 

John just stares at his feet, jaws clenched, that 
familiar tightness in his head. My blood pressure 
must be soaring, he told himself. I can’t handle this. 
If I’m not careful. I’ll be a psychological success, 
but I’ll die from a stroke. No, that’s an exaggeration. 
Or is it? I’m bullshitting myself so much that I don’t 
even know what I want, or think, or feel. . . 

John, perhaps that’s enough for today. 

Yes, that’s right. That’s enough ... for today. 

See you next week, same time. 

Yeah. Thanks. I’ll see you next week. 


'Dr. Shaw learned later on something of what was going through John’s mind during these lengthy silences. 



Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 59 


Discussion 


It has been known for thousands of years that mental and emotional states can 
affect the functioning of the body. When a person is under emotional stress, 
there are numerous physiological changes, such as increases in heart rate and 
in blood pressure; these changes are usually temporary, diminishing when the 
stressor is removed. But in some individuals, the changes persist; when this hap¬ 
pens over a long period of time, a disorder can result. Many medical illnesses 
are caused in part, or are markedly affected by, psychological factors. A disease 
such as hypertension can be life threatening even when it appears to be arising 
primarily from a person’s emotions. Both biological and psychological theories 
have been proposed to explain why certain people who are exposed to stress will 
develop a disorder. 


Biological Theories 

The somatic-weakness theory states that a particular organ—for genetic reasons 
or because of poor diet or earlier illnesses—can be weak and thus vulnerable to 
stress. Thus, the connection between stress and a particular medical disorder is a 
weakness in a specific bodily organ. 

According to the specific-reaction theory, individuals respond to stress in 
their own idiosyncratic ways, and the bodily system that is the most responsive 
becomes a likely candidate for the locus of a subsequent disorder. For example, 
someone reacting to stress with elevated blood pressure may be more susceptible 
to essential hypertension. 

A third biological theory asserts that the biological changes that stress 
produces are adaptive in the short run, for example, mobilizing energy 
resources in preparation for physical activity, but that the body pays a price 
if it must constantly adapt to stress (McEwen, 1998). This can take the form 
of difficulties “shutting down’’ the biological stress response, for example, by 
exhibiting an unusually high level of cortisol secretion even after the stress has 
abated. 

A fourth theory focuses on the body’s immune system, which is involved 
in fighting off infections. Stress can weaken the functioning of the immune sys¬ 
tem and thereby play a role in such diseases as cancer and allergies as well as 
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, in which people’s immune 
systems actually attack their own bodies. Chronic psychological stress, such 
as long-term work-related difficulties, is particularly strongly associated with 
immune system dysregulation (Graham, Christian, & Kiecolt-Glaser, 2006). 
Many stressors produce negative effects on the immune system—exams in 
school, bereavement, divorce, looking after a relative with Alzheimer’s disease, 
and natural disasters (Howell, Kern, & Lyubomirsky, 2007). 




60 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Psychological Theories 

Our autonomic nervous systems are equipped to respond to danger with either 
fight or flight, and the healthy body prepares itself by increasing the rate of 
breathing, diverting blood into the muscles, and releasing sugar into the blood¬ 
stream. When danger has passed, this burst of sympathetic nervous system 
activity subsides. People respond in this way to psychological dangers as well. 
Thoughts can activate our autonomic nervous systems, thereby maintaining 
our bodies in a state of hyperarousal, as if we were runners in a 100-yard dash 
crouched at the starting line and tensely ready for the race, expectant and highly 
aroused. 

People can become distressed and emotionally aroused by thinking about 
regrets from the past and worries about the future. Appraisal, one characteristic 
of our cognitive activity, is important: One person can judge a particular situa¬ 
tion as dangerous, whereas another may view it as challenging and interesting; 
these different cognitions lead to different reactions in the body. 

Investigators have to consider both physical diatheses, or predispositions, 
and highly specific psychological ways of reacting to stress. One person might 
have a genetically determined tendency to react to emotional situations with ele¬ 
vated blood pressure, and thus be at risk for hypertension, but will not develop it 
without a stressful life. Another person might have a constitution that is not dis¬ 
posed to react in an abnormal way to stress and have blood pressure that declines 
rapidly after a stressor is removed. 


Essential Hypertension 

High blood pressure, or hypertension, is involved in many deaths each year and 
is occurring at younger and younger ages. Despite better treatments, there has 
recently been a 3% increase in Americans’ hypertension-related deaths (Farag 
& Mills, 2004). If blood pressure remains elevated—above 140/90 is regarded 
as high—a strain is placed on the cardiovascular system, and over time, there 
is an increased risk of stroke or heart attack. Only about 10 to 15% of all cases 
of hypertension in the United States are due to an identifiable physical cause; 
the other 85 to 90% are essential or primary hypertension. Hypertension is more 
likely in developed, industrialized societies than in traditional, less-developed 
societies (Dressier, 2004). In industrialized countries, the lifetime risk of hyper¬ 
tension is more than 90% (Messerli, Williams, & Ritz, 2007). 

According to recent estimates, 20% of adults in the United States have vary¬ 
ing degrees of hypertension; it is twice as frequent in African Americans as in 
European Americans. Obesity, especially fat stored in the abdomen, is linked 
to hypertension, and adolescent boys with higher waist circumference show 
more increases in blood pressure in response to physical and mental stress 
(Goldbacher, Matthews, & Salomon, 2005). As many as 10% of college students 
are hypertensive; most are unaware of their illness. Unless people have their 



Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 61 


blood pressure checked, they may go for years without realizing it. This disease 
is referred to as the “silent killer” because, over time, it is dangerous to a per¬ 
son’s physical health, and it can be present for years without the person knowing 
it. Sometimes symptoms do develop, as they did for John: fatigue, nervousness, 
dizziness, heart palpitations, headaches, and sometimes even a feeling of pres¬ 
sure in the head. In addition to stroke and heart attack, uncontrolled hyperten¬ 
sion can eventually lead to renal failure and dementia (Messerli et al., 2007). 

A number of psychosocial factors are related to hypertension: mental stress, 
anger and hostility, depression, social isolation, and effects of racism. These fac¬ 
tors tend to cluster in low socioeconomic groups and compound the risk for car¬ 
diovascular disease (Williams, Barefoot, & Schneiderman, 2003). Research on 
each will be examined. 

The first factor is stress, which increases blood pressure in the short term. 
Jobs that have high levels of strain and stress have been linked to higher levels of 
blood pressure, especially when high levels of psychological demands (quantity 
of work, intellectual effort, and time pressure) are paired with low ability to con¬ 
trol one’s decisions (Guimont et ah, 2006). Cumulative job strain over time leads 
to increased blood pressure for men working in white-collar jobs, especially 
when levels of social support in the workplace are low. People who report low 
levels of control in their jobs, such as not being able to control when they take 
breaks, have higher blood pressure (Steptoe & Willemsen, 2004). People who 
work in active jobs that combine high levels of control with high levels of chal¬ 
lenge were found to have lower blood pressure and less hypertension (Stephan 
& Roesler, 2010). In a study of a manufacturing plant in Norway undergoing 
two rounds of layoffs, there was a significant increase in blood pressure in both 
groups, those laid off and those continuously employed, during the first round, in 
which orders were coming from a central office, and the local management and 
unions were powerless (Kjeldsen et al., 2006). During the second round, there 
was no increase, perhaps because decision-making control was retained at the 
plant. However, people differ in their reactivity to stress. Research has shown 
that people who show more cardiovascular reactivity to stress (greater changes 
in heart rate and blood pressure) and longer periods of time after the end of the 
stress to return to baseline levels, are more likely to later become hypertensive 
(Stewart, Janicki, & Kamarck, 2006). 

The next psychosocial factor to be considered is anger. Of various nega¬ 
tive emotions, anger is most strongly linked to elevated blood pressure (Faber & 
Burns, 1996). People with Type A behavior patterns (competitive, achievement 
oriented, and hostile) are more likely to have hypertension, and anger and hos¬ 
tility are the key elements. People who are impatient and hostile and who feel 
high levels of time urgency are more likely to develop hypertension, even many 
years later (Yan et al., 2003). Experiencing anger has been conclusively linked 
to higher blood pressure, but expressing anger is linked to lower blood pres¬ 
sure (Schum, Jorgensen, Verhaeghen, Sauro, & Thibodeau, 2003). People with 
essential hypertension may have a social skills deficit, that is, an inability to be 



62 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


assertive when angry (Larkin & Zayfert, 2004). Assertive, constructive responses 
to anger are linked to lower blood pressure (Hogan & Linden, 2004). 

One relevant study examined hostility (cynicism, distrust, resentment, and 
anger) and suppression (tendency to not disclose negative psychological symp¬ 
toms, along with trying to conform to society). Researchers found that people 
who are high on suppressed hostility (trying to avoid reporting their angry feel¬ 
ings) were significantly more likely to have hypertension 3 years later (Zhang et 
al., 2005). Either intentionally or unconsciously suppressing hostile, angry feel¬ 
ings was thought to lead to chronic physiological arousal for fear of losing con¬ 
trol of the anger, and therefore raising blood pressure. John’s habit of inhibiting 
anger and avoiding thinking about it, and his resentment of racial discrimination, 
likely played a role in his high blood pressure. 

Depression has also been examined for its contributions to hypertension. 
Negative mood states have been linked to hypertension (Pollard & Schwartz, 
2003). People who are depressed are more likely to have hypertension (Bosworth, 
Bartash, Olsen, & Steffens, 2003). Negative emotions (depression, anxiety, hos¬ 
tility, and emotional suppression) were found to be more likely in people who 
grew up in families that lived in poverty or were characterized by harshness, 
and these negative emotions were linked to higher blood pressure in adulthood 
(Lehman, Taylor, Kiefe, & Seeman, 2009). In a study of African American men 
with hypertension, depression was linked to poorer adherence to treatment and 
to alcohol and tobacco use (Kim, Han, Hill, Rose, & Roary, 2003). Depression 
and social isolation may interact in contributing to hypertension. Social sup¬ 
port may serve as a protective factor. People in cohesive, supportive marriages 
had lower levels of hypertension (Baker, Szalai, Paquette, & Tobe, 2003). In 
addition, depression likely directly impacts hypertension through sympathetic 
nervous system activity and cortisol levels (Scherrer et al., 2003). 

There is a higher incidence of hypertension among African Americans. One 
reason for this might be their experience of racism and discrimination (Clark, 
Anderson, Clark, & Williams, 1999). Exposure to racism has been repeat¬ 
edly shown to elevate blood pressure among African American participants in 
research experiments. The blood pressure increase depends on the type of rac¬ 
ism expressed, the perception of the racism by the research participant, and the 
person’s psychological and situational characteristics. Subtle forms of racism, 
when perceived, led to a greater increase in blood pressure among college stu¬ 
dent participants than blatant racism (Merritt, Bennett, Williams, Edwards, & 
Sobers, 2006). Moreover, significant physical reactions to racist images occurred 
in some people even though they had no subjective awareness of distress (Peters, 
Butler, Gjini, Yeragani, & Boutros, 2011). African American female college stu¬ 
dents showed more cardiovascular reactivity to stress when they had higher lev¬ 
els of perceived racism but only for women who had low levels of seeking social 
support (Clark, 2006). The type of coping mechanism the person uses may 
make a difference (Brondolo, Rieppi, Kelly, & Gerin, 2003). One hypothesis to 
explain the higher risk for hypertension among African Americans is the John 



Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 63 


Henryism hypothesis, based on a legend about a man of that name. It suggests 
that people who face socioeconomic adversity and inequity with active coping 
strategies of commitment to hard work and a strong determination to succeed 
are actually at higher risk for high blood pressure (Fernander, Duran, Saab, & 
Schneiderman, 2004). This coping strategy was linked with higher blood pres¬ 
sure among African American men with high education and African American 
women with low education. John Williams fits this hypothesis particularly well. 
His constant striving for perfection exacerbated his level of stress, over and 
above the pressure probably created by the prejudice he sometimes encountered. 
He was also affected by worrying about whether or not subtle forms of racism 
were occurring in his club. His blood pressure was apparently increased as well 
by the tremendous conflicts he experienced as an African American man who 
felt he was being false to himself, who compromised his beliefs and ideals to 
succeed in White society. A core issue in the identity of African American men 
is the tension between African cultural values of communalism, interdepend¬ 
ence, and emotional expression, and European American cultural values of inde¬ 
pendence, competitiveness, and suppression of emotions (Bridges, 2010). The 
value systems of family, church, community, and place of employment some¬ 
times clash, causing stress. 

Much of the research has been a search for risk factors for hypertension. 
A newer research focus is a search for protective factors, traits, or experiences 
that prevent hypertension. There is evidence that having high levels of posi¬ 
tive emotions reduces the chance of developing hypertension. These effects are 
more than the absence of negative emotions; a person with positive emotions 
has lower blood pressure than a person with neither positive nor negative emo¬ 
tions. Two positive emotions that are particularly linked are hope and curiosity 
(Richman et ah, 2005). Hope is a sense of optimism about the future and a feel¬ 
ing of competence to meet future demands, and curiosity is how much a person 
is engaged by the social environment and will explore new things. People with 
the highest levels of either of these positive emotions had about a 48% reduction 
in their risk of developing hypertension during the following year as compared 
to the people with the lowest levels of either of these emotions. 

Psychological Treatment of Hypertension 

Medications to lower blood pressure are effective. But the undesirable side 
effects of these medications—drowsiness, light-headedness, and, in men, erec¬ 
tile difficulties—as well as the growth of behavioral approaches to treatment, 
have led many investigators to explore nonpharmacological treatments for bor¬ 
derline essential hypertension. Those with more severe hypertension usually 
take drugs to control its deleterious long-term effects. However, studies look¬ 
ing at large numbers of patients in the community who have taken medication 
for many years found increased rather than decreased mortality, and there is 
increasing interest in nonpharmacological treatments (Linden, 2003). 



64 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Healthy weight loss, improved diet, and increased exercise are effective at 
reducing high blood pressure (Elmer et al., 2006). But these medical measures 
also involve psychological change components (Dubbert, 1995). Many therapists 
agree that anxiety, and sometimes anger, must be reduced to lessen the sympa¬ 
thetic nervous system arousal that plays a role in maintaining blood pressure at 
abnormally high levels. Therapy can help the client cope better with pressures 
and anxiety and thereby reduce blood pressure. 

Client-centered therapists would focus on John’s denial of his inner self, 
that is, not marching to the beat of his own drum and compromising his ideas 
and deeply felt beliefs to meet with favor and acceptance from others (especially 
his father), or “conditions of worth” (Rogers, 1951). Dr. Shaw was operating in 
this framework, but we have seen that he did not get further than suggesting to 
John that he might be acting against his own self. The transcript provided earlier 
shows the kind of empathic listening and reflection common in client-centered 
therapy. Note, however, that Dr. Shaw did not merely reflect back to John what 
he had just said, but empathizes: 

John: Doc, I can’t talk to a White man about this. I can’t talk to a 

Black man about this. I’m too ashamed, too mixed up (begin¬ 
ning to sob). I can’t handle this. 

Dr. Shaw: This is hard for you, I know, John.... 

Dr. Shaw acknowledges that he appreciates how difficult it is for John to 
talk about his private thoughts. The hope is that the relationship will be strength¬ 
ened and that John will be encouraged to continue exploring his feelings. 
In another part of the session, however, Dr. Shaw goes beyond what John has 
expressed, restating to him what he believes is going on with John. He makes an 
inference, an interpretation about what is troubling the client in the hope of help¬ 
ing John view himself in a new, better perspective, one that will generate move¬ 
ment and greater self-honesty (Dr. Shaw has asked John how he felt about being 
the only African American in his club at college). 

Dr. Shaw: [I’d like to know about] your feelings of being the only Black. 

John: Well, I felt really good about it.... My high school friends 

would’ve envied me to the utmost.... 

Dr. Shaw: Yes, I know you were quite proud about it.... But I wonder if 
you had any other feelings about it. 

This statement was too confrontational. Dr. Shaw was on target, but John 
was too frightened, too angry to consider the interpretation. This error in push¬ 
ing too quickly for movement may have been because of Dr. Shaw’s impatience 
with himself for dancing too gingerly around John’s problems for fear of sound¬ 
ing bigoted. 



Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 65 


Relaxation training and meditation have also been used with some success 
in efforts to control hypertension (Yung & Keltner, 1996). When relaxation was 
compared with an information-only treatment, anger and hostility were reduced 
more by the relaxation, and this was accompanied by a reduction in blood pres¬ 
sure (Davison, Williams, Nezami, Bice, & DeQuattro, 1991). Teaching clients 
coping skills for handling stress and encouraging meditation have been effec¬ 
tive treatments (Williams et al., 2003). Some clinicians target Type A behavior 
directly, to reduce hostility and time urgency. Others advocate the treatment of 
depression to improve hypertension. 

African American urban residents have particularly low levels of adher¬ 
ence with medication therapy and are sometimes suspicious and distrustful of 
their physicians (Lukoschek, 2003). For urban African American men who are 
at high risk for hypertension but are often underserved by the health-care sys¬ 
tem, an intensive team approach that incorporated education, home visits, and 
telephone checks produced more reductions in hypertension than a traditional 
medical approach (Hill et al, 2003). In one study, some African American 
patients expressed concern that they would become addicted to their medication 
and would only take them if they felt symptoms (Ogedegbe, Harrison, Robbins, 
Mancuso, & Allegrante, 2004). 

Issues of Race and Psychotherapy 

When clients and therapists are similar in ethnicity, it is easier to establish 
and maintain a therapeutic alliance and obtain a positive therapeutic outcome 
(Farsimadan, Draghi-Lorenz, & Ellis, 2007). At the same time, studies suggest 
that racial differences are not insurmountable barriers to understanding between 
counselor and client (Beutler, Machado, & Neufeldt, 1994). Therapists with high 
levels of empathy are perceived as more helpful by clients, regardless of eth¬ 
nic background. Therapists report that when they address race with their clients 
who are a different race, it has positive effects on the therapy (Knox, Burkard, 
Johnson, Suzuki, & Ponterotto, 2003). Talking openly about these issues 
improves rapport. 

Therapists need to understand that virtually all African Americans have 
encountered prejudice and racism, and many must often wrestle with their 
anger at a majority culture that is sometimes insensitive to and unappreciative 
of the emotional consequences of growing up as a feared, resented, and some¬ 
times hated minority (Hardy & Laszloffy, 1995). They have to be aware of the 
subtle forms of aggression, exclusion, and invalidation that can occur during 
interactions between White Americans and members of racial and ethnic minor¬ 
ity groups (Sue et al., 2007). It takes extra effort on the part of therapists to be 
aware of their own subtle prejudices, and managing this aspect of the therapeutic 
relationship is an important part of the therapy. Often, White therapists become 
anxious and defensive when openly discussing race, and this damages the therapist- 
client rapport. These difficulties may lead clients who are members of racial or 



66 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


ethnic minority groups to leave therapy prematurely. African Americans who are 
more acculturated to the dominant culture may have a greater expectation that 
therapy would work but also may have mixed feelings about being in therapy 
because they have had more experiences of being discriminated against by mem¬ 
bers of the dominant culture (Obasi & Leong, 2009). These issues are vividly 
illustrated in the case of John Williams, both throughout his life and in his brief 
dealings with his therapist. 

Mention has already been made of how being African American might con¬ 
tribute to high blood pressure. John Williams’s race also played a role in his 
therapy. 

Therapists have to get past any prejudices they may have to relate to clients 
of different racial and ethnic backgrounds and to place race in a context that will 
promote a fruitful assessment and intervention instead of impeding them. 

These issues are seen in the case of John Williams. Should the therapist 
have encouraged a more assertive stance toward the prejudices that seemed to 
be oppressing him? Or should he have promoted an adjustment to the situation, 
an attitude that John really had things good, that life is imperfect, and perhaps 
he should just find a way to make the best of it? Did John Williams wish that he 
were White? Should John have declined the invitation to the club at Harvard? 
Was his wish to be accepted by his White classmates an unhealthy one, or could 
it be seen as no less healthy than the wish a White initiate would have? Was John 
really “Uncle-Tomming” by joining the exclusive group while fearing that true 
acceptance would ultimately be denied him? Was he not “truly” accepted by his 
club members? If people were being nice to him, was it because he was African 
American and they were trying to demonstrate their liberalism and open- 
mindedness? How was he to know if they really liked him? 

Dr. Shaw was reluctant to push John more than he would have a White cli¬ 
ent. There is a general issue in psychotherapy about how much pressure a thera¬ 
pist should place on a client. Clients can be hurt if their therapists demand more 
of them than they are capable of giving. On the other hand, the art of therapy 
requires that therapists encourage movement on the part of their clients that 
might not occur otherwise. After some hesitation, Dr. Shaw did apply such pres¬ 
sure, but he seemed to misread his client’s readiness to explore his conflicts 
and lost the opportunity to work further with him. By most standards, Dr. Shaw 
failed with John Williams. 

Dr. Shaw should have anticipated the difficulties in establishing rapport. 
John was suspicious and hostile, wondering whether Dr. Shaw would be able 
to empathize with his suffering: Will he truly be able to appreciate the ten¬ 
sions I am under? How will he judge my desires to be accepted by Whites for 
what I am, my fierce pride in being African American, especially as I succeed 
in a White world? Will he see me as copping out or decide that my inhibition of 
resentment is adaptive and healthy? Indeed, will and can the therapist help me 
explore within myself what I really want? Must I want only what other African 
Americans want to be a whole person? 



Chapter 4 Hypertension in an African American Man 67 


Discussion Questions 


1. If you were a psychotherapist treating a person of a different racial or ethnic 
background, do you think there would be any issues for you to consider? Do 
you agree with those who recommend discussing these issues in the therapy, 
or do you think that would be counterproductive? 

2. Were you surprised at the letter Bill received from the university about room¬ 
ing with John? Are subtle forms of racism continuing today, or have things 
really changed? 

3. What did you think about John’s thoughts and feelings about the club? How 
did his cognitions and coping style about this and about his ambivalence 
about his career success help him? How did it hurt him? 

4 . Which personality traits increase a person’s risk for hypertension? Which 
protect them from hypertension? 




CHAPTER 5 


Dissociative Identity Disorder: 
Multiple Personality 


The instructor in Paula’s human sexuality course suggested that she talk to a 
psychologist. Several factors contributed to his concern: Although Paula was 
a good student, her behavior in class had been rather odd on occasion. Every 
now and then, it seemed as though she came to class “high.” She participated 
actively in the discussions, but she did not seem to be familiar with the readings 
or previous lecture material. Her scores on the first two exams had been A’s, but 
she failed to appear for the third. When he asked her where she had been, Paula 
maintained with apparent sincerity that she couldn’t remember. Finally, she had 
handed in an essay assignment that described in rather vague, but sufficiently 
believable, terms the abusive, incestuous relationship that her father had forced 
upon her from the age of 5 until well after she was married and had had her first 
child. All of this led her professor to believe that Paula needed help. Fortunately, 
she was inclined to agree with him because several things were bothering her. 
She made an appointment to talk to Dr. Harpin, a clinical psychologist at the 
student health center. 

Paula Stewart was 38 years old, divorced, and the mother of a son who was 
18 and a daughter who was 15. She was about 90 pounds overweight, but in 
other ways, her appearance was unremarkable. For the past 5 years, Paula had 
been taking courses at the university and working part time at a variety of secre¬ 
tarial positions on campus. She and her daughter lived together in a small, rural 
community located about 20 miles from the university—the same town in which 
Paula had been born. Her son had moved away from home after dropping out 
of high school. Paula’s mother and father still lived in their home just down the 
street from Paula’s. 

Over a series of sessions. Dr. Harpin noticed that Paula’s behavior was often 
erratic. Her moods vacillated frequently and quickly from anger and irritability 
to severe depression. When she was depressed, her movements became agitated, 
and she mentioned that she experienced sleep difficulties. She threatened suicide 


68 



Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 69 


frequently and had, on several occasions, made some attempts to harm herself. 
In addition to these emotional difficulties, Paula frequently complained of severe 
headaches, dizziness, and breathing problems. 

It also seemed that Paula abused alcohol, although the circumstances were 
not clear. This situation was a source of distress and considerable confusion for 
Paula. She had found empty beer cans and whiskey bottles in the back seat of 
her car, but she denied drinking alcoholic beverages of any kind. Once every 2 
or 3 weeks, she would wake up in the morning with terrible headaches as though 
she were hungover. Dr. Harpin believed that her confusion and other memory 
problems could be explained by her alcohol consumption. 

Paula’s relationships with other people were unpredictable. She would 
explode with little provocation and often argued that no one understood how 
serious her problems were. On occasion, she threatened to kill other people, par¬ 
ticularly an older man, Cal, who lived nearby. Paula’s relationship with Cal was 
puzzling to both of them. They had known each other since she was an adoles¬ 
cent. Although he was 15 years older than she and had been married to another 
woman for more than 20 years, Cal had persistently shown a romantic interest in 
Paula. He would frequently come to her house saying that she had called. More 
often than not, this made Paula furious. She maintained that she was not at all 
interested in him and would never encourage such behavior. At other times, how¬ 
ever, she insisted that he was the only person who understood and cared for her. 

Paula’s father was still alive, but she did not spend any time with him. 
In fact, he behaved as though she didn’t exist. She was able to recall and dis¬ 
cuss some aspects of the incestuous relationship her father had forced upon 
her in previous years, but her memory was sketchy, and she preferred not to 
discuss him. 

Throughout the first year of treatment, Paula’s memory problems became 
increasingly severe. The notes she wrote during classes were often incomplete, 
as though she had suddenly stopped listening in the middle of a number of lec¬ 
tures. She sometimes complained that she lost parts of days. On one occasion, 
for example, she told Dr. Harpin that she had gone home with a severe head¬ 
ache in the middle of the afternoon and then couldn’t remember anything until 
she awakened the following morning. Another time she was eating lunch, only 
to find herself hours later driving her car. Her daughter asked her about a loud 
argument Paula had had with her mother on the phone, and she couldn’t remem¬ 
ber even talking to her mother that day. These unexplained experiences were 
extremely frustrating to Paula, but the therapist continued to believe that they 
were induced by alcohol. 

One day, Dr. Harpin received a message from his secretary saying that 
a woman named Sherry had called. She had identified herself as a friend of 
Paula’s and had said that she would like to discuss the case. Before respond¬ 
ing directly to this request. Dr. Harpin decided to check with Paula to find out 
more about this friend and determine whether she would give her consent for 
this consultation. Paula denied knowing anyone named Sherry, so Dr. Harpin did 



70 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


not return the call. It did strike him as odd, however, that someone knew that he 
was Paula’s therapist. 

Two weeks after receiving this call, Dr. Hatpin decided to use hypnosis in an 
attempt to explore the frequent gaps in Paula’s memory. They had used hypnosis 
on one previous occasion as an aid to the process of applied relaxation, and it was 
clear that Paula was easily hypnotized. Unfortunately, it didn’t help with the mem¬ 
ory problem; Paula couldn’t remember anything else about the time she had lost. 

Upon waking out of a trance, Paula complained of a splitting headache. 
She gazed slowly about the room as though she were lost. Dr. Harpin was 
puzzled. “Do you know where you are?” he asked. She said she didn’t know, 
so he asked if she knew who he was. Rather than providing a quick answer, 
she glanced around the room. She noticed his professional license hanging on 
the wall, read his name, and finally replied, “Yes. You’re Dr. Harpin, the one 
who’s working with Paula.” This switch to her use of the third person struck Dr. 
Harpin as being odd and roused further curiosity about her state of mind. 

“How do you feel?” 

“Okay.” 

“Do you still have a headache?” 

“No. I don’t have a headache.” 

The way she emphasized the word “I” was unusual, so Dr. Harpin said, 
“You make it sound like somebody else has a headache.” He was completely 
unprepared for her response: 

“Yes. Paula does.” 

Pausing for a moment to collect his wits, Dr. Harpin—who was simultane¬ 
ously confused and fascinated by this startling exchange—decided to pursue the 
identity issue further. 

“If Paula has a headache, but you don’t, what’s your name?” 

“Why should I tell you? I don’t think I can trust you.” 

“Why not? Don’t you want to talk to me?” 

“Why should I? You wouldn’t talk to me when I called last week!” 

Dr. Harpin finally remembered the call from Sherry, who had wanted to 
talk to him about Paula’s case. He asked the woman, once again, what her name 
was, and she said, “Sherry.” After they talked for a couple of minutes, Dr. Harpin 
said, “I’d like to talk to Paula now.” 

“Oh, she’s boring.” 

“That doesn't matter. She’s my client, and I want to talk to her to see 

how she feels.” 



Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 71 


“Will you talk to me again?” 

“Yes.” 

“Why should I believe you? You wouldn’t talk to me before.” 

“Now I know who you are. Please let me talk to Paula.” 

At that point, she closed her eyes and waited quietly for a few moments. 
When her eyes opened, Paula was back and her headache was gone, but she 
could not remember anything about the past half hour. Dr. Harpin was stunned 
and incredulous. Although he was aware of the literature on dissociative identity 
disorder (DID) and a few well-known cases, he could not believe what Paula 
had said. 

When Paula appeared for their next appointment, she still could not remem¬ 
ber anything that had happened and seemed just as she had before this remark¬ 
able incident. Dr. Harpin decided to attempt to discuss with Paula a traumatic 
incident that had happened a number of years ago. Paula had frequently men¬ 
tioned a day when she was 15 years old. She couldn’t remember the details, but 
it was clearly a source of considerable distress for her and seemed to involve 
her father. 

Dr. Harpin asked Paula to describe what she could remember about the day: 
where they were living at the time, what time of year it was, who was home, 
and so on. Paula filled in the details slowly and as best she could. Her father 
had grabbed her, hit her across the face, and dragged her toward the bedroom. 
No matter how hard she tried, she couldn't remember anything else. Paula said 
that she was getting a headache. Dr. Harpin suggested that she lean back in the 
chair and breathe slowly. She paused for a moment and closed her eyes. In a few 
moments, she opened her eyes and said, “She can’t remember. She wasn't there. 
I was!” Sherry was back. 

Paula’s appearance had changed suddenly. She had been very tense, clutch¬ 
ing the arms of the chair and sitting upright. She also had had an annoying, 
hacking cough. Now she eased down in the chair, folded her arms, and crossed 
her legs in front of her. The cough was completely gone. Sherry explained why 
Paula couldn’t remember the incident with her father. As Sherry put it, when 
Paula was dragged into the bedroom, she “decided to take off,” leaving Sherry 
to experience the pain and humiliation of the ensuing rape. Dr. Harpin translated 
this to mean that Paula had experienced a dissociative episode. The incident was 
so extremely traumatic that she had completely separated the experience and its 
memory from the rest of her consciousness. 

After discussing the rape in some detail. Dr. Harpin decided to find out as 
much as he could about Sherry. She provided only sketchy information, admit¬ 
ting that she was in her thirties but denying that she had a last name. Sherry’s 
attitude toward Paula was contemptuous. She was angry because Paula had so 
frequently left Sherry to experience painful sexual encounters. They discussed 
numerous incidents dating from Paula’s adolescence to the present, but none of 
Sherry’s memories traced back prior to the incident with Paula’s father. Since 



72 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


that time, Sherry was apparently aware of everything that Paula had done. Paula, 
on the other hand, was completely oblivious to Sherry’s existence. 

Toward the end of this conversation, Dr. Harpin asked whether it was Sherry 
or Paula who had been responsible for the beer bottles Paula found in her car. 
Sherry said, “Oh, we did that.” Intrigued by the plural pronoun, Dr. Harpin asked 
whom she meant to describe, and the patient said, “Oh, Janet and I.” 

“Who’s Janet?” 

“You don’t want to talk to her. She’s always angry. You know how ado¬ 
lescents are.” 

By this point, Dr. Harpin knew that Sherry found it easier than Paula to 
switch back and forth among these personalities, so he encouraged her to try. 
Sherry agreed, somewhat reluctantly, and soon there was another dramatic 
change in Paula’s appearance. She fidgeted in her chair, pulled at her hair, and 
began to bounce her leg continuously. She was reluctant to talk, but adopted a 
coy, somewhat flirtatious manner. She claimed to be 15 years old. 

Several sessions later, Sherry presented Dr. Harpin with a request. She said 
that she and Janet were extremely concerned about Caroline, who was presum¬ 
ably only 5 years old and had been crying a lot lately. Sherry and Janet wanted 
Dr. Harpin to talk to Caroline. He agreed to try. Sherry closed her eyes and 
effortlessly transformed her posture and mannerisms to those of a little girl. She 
pulled her legs up onto the chair and folded them under her body. Holding her 
hand in a fist clenched close to the side of her mouth almost as if she were suck¬ 
ing her thumb, she turned sideways in the chair and peered at Dr. Harpin bash¬ 
fully out of the corner of her eye. She seemed to be rather frightened. 

“Will you talk to me, Caroline?” Dr. Harpin began. 

After an extended pause, Caroline asked, “What’s your name? I don’t know 
you.” Her voice seemed higher and weaker than it had been moments before. 

“I’m Dr. Harpin.” 

“Do you know my mommy and daddy?” 

“No. But I’m a friend of Sherry’s. She asked me to talk to you. Do you 

know Sherry?” 

“Yes. She watches me. She takes care of me.” 

“Do you know Janet?” 

“She’s big. She has fun!” 

“Do you know her very well?” 

“Not really. She gets mad easy.” 

“Sherry told me that you’ve been feeling sad. Why is that?” 

“I’m a bad girl.” 

“Why do you think you’re bad?” 



Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 73 


“Mommy told me I’m bad. That’s why she has to punish me.” 

“I don’t think you’re a bad girl.” 

“Yes I am. If I’m not bad, why would they punish me?” 

“What do they punish you for?” 

“I don’t know. They just do. They hurt me. Once 1 pinched my brother 

when he took my toy puppy. Then they took my puppy away, and they 

won’t give it back! Grandpa gave it to me. He’s good to me.” 

At their next session. Dr. Harpin asked Paula if she remembered ever having 
a stuffed puppy when she was a child. A fond smile of recognition followed sev¬ 
eral moments' reflection. She had indeed had such a toy. He asked if she knew 
what had happened to it. She insisted that she had no idea. It had been almost 30 
years since she remembered seeing it, but she agreed to look around in the attic 
of her mother’s house. 

Much to everyone’s surprise, Paula was able to find the puppy, which was 
known as Jingles because of the sound made by a small bell sewn into its tail. 
Unfortunately, it became the source of considerable aggravation for Paula. The 
first day she found it, she left it in the living room before she went to bed. When 
she woke up in the morning. Jingles was in bed with her. This happened two 
nights in a row. On the third night, she locked the puppy in her car, which was 
kept in the garage, and went to bed. Once again, the puppy was in bed with her 
when she woke up in the morning. She was annoyed and also a bit frightened by 
this strange turn of events. In subsequent sessions, Sherry provided the following 
explanation for what had happened. Caroline would wake up in the middle of 
the night crying, wanting to hold her stuffed animal. In an effort to console her, 
Sherry would then retrieve Jingles from the living room or garage. Of course, 
Paula would not remember what had happened. 

Thus far there were four names: Paula, Sherry, Janet, and Caroline. The 
clinical picture was as fascinating as it was unbelievable. Dr. Harpin felt that 
he needed help as much as his client. In his 15 years of clinical experience, 
he had never seen a case that resembled Paula’s in any way. It fit closely with 
some of the published cases of DID, but he had never really believed that 
this sort of thing happened, except in fiction. Surely it was the product of the 
therapist’s imagination, or the client’s manipulative strategy, he had believed. 
He sought advice from colleagues about a plan for the treatment of this com¬ 
plex set of problems. His contacts with Paula continued to deal largely with 
day-to-day crises. 

He asked Paula if she had read any of the well-known books or watched any 
of the popular films dealing with DID ( which was formerly called multiple per¬ 
sonality). She had not. Because she was not familiar with other examples of this 
phenomenon, it seemed unlikely that she had simply invented the alter person¬ 
alities as a way of attracting attention or convincing others of the severity of her 
problems. In an attempt to help Paula—who was not aware of the alters—under¬ 
stand the problems that she faced. Dr. Harpin asked her to read The Three Faces 



74 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


of Eve, the book upon which the famous film was based. She reacted with inter¬ 
est and disbelief. What did it have to do with her situation? She was still com¬ 
pletely unable to remember those times when she spoke as if she were Sherry, 
Janet, or Caroline. Later, however, there were times when Sherry discussed the 
book with Dr. Harpin, and Janet was also reading it. To make matters more con¬ 
fusing, they all seemed to be reading at a different pace. Paula might be two 
thirds of the way through the book, but Janet—an adolescent who did not read as 
quickly—was aware of only the first part of the book. 

Dr. Harpin also used videotape to help Paula understand the problem. With 
her consent, he recorded her behavior during a sequence of three therapy ses¬ 
sions. She alternated among the various personalities several times during the 
course of these tapes. Paula was then asked to view the tapes and discuss her 
reactions to her own behavior. Again, she was surprised, interested, and puzzled, 
showing no signs of previous awareness of this behavior. She would often ask, 
“Did I say that?” or “Who am I? What am I?” 

Another unusual set of circumstances led to the identification of still another 
personality. Heather. Paula had complained on numerous occasions that a loaded 
shotgun, which belonged to her father, kept appearing at her house. She had 
no use for guns, and their presence upset her, so she would take the gun back 
to her father’s house. Several days later, she would find it again at her house. 
Her parents and daughter adamantly denied knowing anything about the gun. 
Recognizing that Paula was frequently unaware of things that she did as the 
other personalities, Dr. Harpin discussed the gun with Sherry and Janet. Both 
denied any knowledge of these incidents. Janet said, “I know you think it’s me, 
but it’s not!” Finally, Sherry suggested that it might be someone else. “You mean 
there might be others?” Dr. Harpin asked. Sherry acknowledged the possibility, 
but said that she was not aware of any others. 

At the beginning of the next session, Dr. Harpin decided to use hypnosis in 
an effort to see if he could identify more alters. While Paula was in the trance, 
he asked if anyone else, with whom he had not yet spoken, was able to hear 
what he was saying. This was when Heather emerged. She was presumably 23. 
It was she who had been bringing the gun to Paula’s house, and it was she who 
had been calling Cal. Heather told Dr. Harpin that she was in love with Cal. If 
she couldn’t marry him, she wanted to kill herself. This was the first alter with 
whom Sherry did not have co-consciousness, and her existence explained several 
important inconsistencies in Paula’s behavior and gaps in her memory. 

Heather’s affection for Cal illustrates another important characteristic of 
the dissociative identity phenomenon. There were important, and occasion¬ 
ally radical, differences among Paula, Sherry, and the other alters in terms of 
tastes and preferences as well as mannerisms and abilities. Heather loved Cal 
(she couldn’t live without him), but the others hated him. In fact, Paula’s most 
remarkable reaction to videotapes of her own behavior centered around one con¬ 
versation with Heather. Paula insisted that it was not she. “I would never say 
those things!” she said. Paula’s attitude toward her parents was also at odds with 



Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 75 


those of some of the alters, and this inconsistency undoubtedly explained some 
of the erratic shifts in her behavior and relationship with other people. Sherry 
didn’t like Paula’s children and was inconsiderate in her behavior toward them. 
She frequently promised them things to keep them quiet and then failed to honor 
her commitments. 


Social History 


Paula grew up in a small rural community. She had one older brother. Her 
mother was an outspoken, dominant woman who maintained firm control of the 
family. Both parents were strict disciplinarians. The parents of Paula’s mother 
lived nearby. This grandfather was the only sympathetic adult figure through¬ 
out Paula’s childhood. It was he who gave her the stuffed puppy, Jingles, which 
became such an important source of comfort to her until her parents took it 
away. When Paula was upset, her grandfather was the only person who was able 
to console her and stop her crying (although she never dared to tell him about 
the things that her father forced her to do). 

Paula’s father was a shy, withdrawn, unaffectionate man who did not have 
many friends. For the first few years of her life, he ignored her completely. Then, 
when she was 5 years old, he began to demonstrate physical affection. He would 
hug and kiss her roughly, and when no one else was around, he would fondle 
her genitals. Paula didn't know how to respond. His touches weren’t pleasant or 
enjoyable, but she would accept whatever affection he was willing to provide. 

When she was 15, their sexual encounters started to become violent. The 
pretense of affection and love was obviously dissolved; he wanted to hurt her. 
In one incident, which Paula and Dr. Harpin had discussed repeatedly, her father 
dragged her into his bedroom by her hair and tied her to the bed. After slapping 
her repeatedly, he forced her to have intercourse with him. The incest and physi¬ 
cal abuse continued until she was 20 years old. 

Paula’s mother was a strict disciplinarian who often punished Paula by 
putting her hands in scalding hot water or locking her in a dark closet for hours 
on end. Mrs. Stewart did not realize—or seem to care—that her husband was 
abusing Paula sexually. If she did know, she may have been afraid to intervene. 
Mr. Stewart may also have abused his wife as well as his daughter, but Paula 
could not remember witnessing any violence between her parents. 

Perhaps in an effort to tear herself away from this abusive family, Paula 
pursued relationships with other men at an early age. Many of these men were 
older than she, including teachers and neighbors. The longest relationship of this 
sort was with Cal, the owner of a small construction business. Paula was 16 and 
Cal was 31 when they started seeing each other. Although he took advantage of 
Paula sexually, Cal was a more sympathetic person than her father. He did listen 
to her, and he seemed to care for her. On numerous occasions, Cal promised that 
he would marry her. For Paula, he was a “rescuer,” someone who offered a way 




76 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


out of her pathological family situation. Unfortunately, he didn’t come through. 
He married another woman but continued to pursue Paula’s affection and sexual 
favors. She continued to oblige, despite the strong feelings of anger and betrayal 
that she harbored. 

A few incidents that occurred while Paula was in high school were prob¬ 
ably precursors of the memory problems and dissociative experiences that she 
later encountered as an adult. They suggest that the problem of alter personali¬ 
ties began during adolescence, although it was not discovered until many years 
later. People sometimes told Paula about things that she had done, things that she 
could not remember doing. Most of these involved promiscuous behavior. Paula 
was particularly upset by a rumor that went around the school when she was a 
sophomore. Several other girls claimed that Paula had been seen in a car with 
three men. They were parked in a remote picnic area outside town, and Paula 
presumably had intercourse with all of them. She couldn’t remember a thing, but 
she also didn’t know where she had been that night. 

After graduating from high school, Paula enrolled in the university's school 
of education, but she dropped out after 1 year. For the next few years, she 
worked at various clerical jobs, while living either at home with her parents or 
in apartments that she rented nearby. She was married briefly, gave birth to her 
children, and was then divorced. Paula decided to return to the university many 
years later, after her son left home. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


Dr. Harpin’s initial diagnostic impression, before the emergence of the alter per¬ 
sonalities, was that Paula fit the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR ; APA, 2000) criteria for both dysthymia (a long-lasting 
form of depression that is not sufficiently severe to meet the criteria for major 
depressive disorder) and borderline personality disorder. Throughout the first 
year of treatment, his approach to the problem was focused primarily on the 
management of frequent, specific crises. These included numerous transient sui¬ 
cidal threats, fights with her mother and daughter, confusion and anger over her 
relationship—or lack of a relationship—with Cal, difficulties in her schoolwork 
and with professors teaching her classes, and a variety of incidents involving her 
employers. When immediate problems of this sort were not pressing, Paula usu¬ 
ally wanted to talk about the way her father had abused her. Her focus was on 
both the anger and the guilt that she felt about these incidents. She wondered 
whether in some way she hadn’t encouraged his sexual advances. 

After the appearance of the alter personalities, Dr. Harpin’s initial hypoth¬ 
esis was that Paula was malingering, that is, feigning a dramatic set of symptoms 
in an effort to gain some benefit from him or her family. This explanation was 
attractive for several reasons, including his skepticism regarding the existence 




Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 77 


of a phenomenon such as DID. Nevertheless, he eventually abandoned this view. 
One problem was the apparent absence of information that would have been nec¬ 
essary for Paula to fake this disorder. She had not read or seen any of the popu¬ 
lar descriptions of the disorder, and it was therefore unlikely that she would be 
able to create or imitate the problem in such a believable, detailed fashion. The 
other problem was the lack of a clear motive. She was not, for example, fac¬ 
ing criminal charges that might be avoided by the existence of a severe form of 
mental illness. Nor was she able to avoid personal or family responsibilities by 
the onset of these conditions because she continued to go to school, perform her 
work, and take care of her daughter after the emergence of the alters. The only 
thing she might stand to gain was increased attention from Dr. Harpin. It seemed 
unlikely that this would explain the problem because he had already been spend¬ 
ing an inordinate amount of time and energy on the case as a result of the previ¬ 
ous suicidal gestures, and he had repeatedly conveyed to Paula his concern for 
her problems. 

It eventually became clear that Paula was experiencing a genuine disrup¬ 
tion of consciousness that was usually precipitated by stressful experiences. 
Faced with an extremely threatening or unpleasant circumstance, Paula would 
often dissociate—entirely blot out (or repress) her awareness of that event. This 
pattern of cognitive activity could apparently be traced to the violent abuse that 
she received from her father during adolescence. By her own description, when 
these events began, Paula would usually “leave” the situation, and Sherry would 
be left to face her father. The turbulent nature of these years and the concentra¬ 
tion of abuse during this time might account for the fact that the ages of most 
of the alters seemed to cluster between 15 and 23. Over time, the extent of this 
fragmentation of conscious experience became more severe, and her control 
over changes in her patterns of awareness eroded progressively. 

One approach to the resolution of these dissociative episodes might involve 
the recall and exploration of previous traumatic experiences that seemed to be 
responsible for particular splits in Paula’s consciousness. Perhaps the most sali¬ 
ent of these episodes was the rape scene involving Paula’s father. The existence 
of Sherry suggested that the split could be traced to about this period of time, 
and it was an incident that Sherry mentioned repeatedly. Previous accounts of 
DID suggest that the patient’s disturbance in consciousness might improve if the 
repression of such memories can be lifted. Unfortunately, this approach did not 
seem to be useful in Paula’s case. She and Dr. Harpin spent many hours discuss¬ 
ing this incident—from the perspectives of both Paula and Sherry—but it only 
seemed to make things worse. 

A different approach was needed. Dr. Harpin had two principal goals in 
mind during the next several months of treatment: to discourage further frag¬ 
mentation of Paula’s conscious experience and to facilitate the integration 
of information across the divisions of conscious experience. In other words, 
without encouraging or crystallizing the existence of separate personalities, 



78 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Dr. Harpin wanted to help Paula recognize the nature of the problem and the 
way her behavior patterns changed in association with loss of memory for 
these incidents. This was done, in part, by having her read and discuss The 
Three Faces of Eve and allowing her to view videotapes of her own behavior. 
Dr. Harpin’s hope was that the videotapes might jog Paula’s memory and begin 
to break down the barriers that had been erected to prevent the exchange of 
information between the subdivisions of her conscious working memory. 


Ten-Year Follow-Up 


Paula remained in treatment with Dr. Harpin for several years during which they 
were able to establish a strong working relationship. Paula trusted Dr. Harpin, 
and based on their extended discussions, she eventually accepted his diagnosis 
of her problem. Treatment continued to follow an interpersonal, problem-solving 
approach, in which Paula was encouraged to learn and use new, nondissociative 
coping skills to deal with stressful events. Emphasis was placed on the identi¬ 
fication of strong feelings and the recognition of logical connections between 
these feelings and specific life events. 

Paula’s relationship with Cal, the older businessman, illustrates the util¬ 
ity of this approach. Their disagreements, and the confusion associated with 
their on-and-off affair, had been a source of considerable anxiety and anger for 
many years. Although it had originally seemed that Cal might rescue Paula from 
her terrible family situation, he had betrayed her by marrying another woman. 
Many people experience this type of bitter disappointment; most find a way to 
resolve their strong, ambivalent feelings and move on to other relationships. 
Unfortunately, for more than 20 years, Paula had responded to her encounters 
with Cal using dissociative responses. She continued the romance through one 
of her alters, Heather. Switching between Paula and Heather, she would alter¬ 
nately threaten to kill Cal and then herself. After many extended discussions of 
this situation with Dr. Harpin, Paula was finally able to recognize that Cal pro¬ 
vided one of the consistent triggers for her dissociative episodes. She confronted 
Cal and ended their relationship. Shortly after this success, Heather stopped 
appearing. That particular alter had apparently been integrated with Paula, the 
host personality. 

Paula’s relationship with her children had been another source of consider¬ 
able stress over the years. Arguments with them, and with her mother over her 
role as a parent, may also have served as a stimulus for dissociative responses. 
Her son and daughter, now young adults, remained angry for many legitimate 
reasons. They had been left alone frequently and inconsistently while they 
were growing up. They had also been bitterly disappointed on numerous occa¬ 
sions when Paula had failed to honor promises that she made to them. Previous 
attempts to discuss these feelings had been fruitless, in large part because Paula 




Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 79 


did not recognize her dissociative disorder as the root of the problem with 
these relationships. Paula had to accept responsibility for her own inconsistent 
and occasionally harmful parenting behaviors. The children also had to under¬ 
stand her disorder. Many sessions were devoted to discussions of these issues 
and to face-to-face meetings between Paula and her daughter (her son lived too 
far away to be included in this process). This aspect of Paula’s family situation 
improved a great deal. 

As treatment progressed, Dr. Harpin made an effort to avoid, whenever pos¬ 
sible, speaking directly to the alters. For example, he sometimes received phone 
calls from Sherry, usually to report something inappropriate that Paula had done. 
Whenever the caller identified herself as one of the alters. Dr. Harpin would 
ask to speak to Paula. He also began to discourage their appearance in sessions. 
Over a period of several months, some of the alters stopped making appearances 
and seemed no longer to influence Paula’s behavior. When asked about them, 
Paula and Sherry (the alter who had been most aware of the others) would reply, 
“Oh, she’s not around anymore.” 

As the number of alters decreased, Dr. Harpin also noticed a shift in 
Sherry’s attitude toward Paula. She had originally been contemptuous and hos¬ 
tile, but she gradually became compassionate and protective. Dr. Harpin some¬ 
times felt that Sherry had become something like a surrogate therapist. Paula 
became increasingly aware of Sherry’s attitudes and feelings, which were some¬ 
times more adaptive or appropriate than Paula’s because they were informed 
by a more complete understanding of her experience (Janet’s being more frag¬ 
mented by dissociative experiences). Some of the tangible distinctions between 
these personalities also seemed to fade. For example, the voices in which Paula 
and Sherry spoke had always been easy to distinguish. Paula was usually dis¬ 
tressed when she called, and her voice was often agitated and shrill. Over time, 
it became softer and more stable in tone. Their accents and vocabularies had also 
been different (with Sherry using a more prominent rural dialect). 


Discussion 


The complex and puzzling nature of dissociative identity disorder (DID) is 
illustrated in the controversy surrounding its name. It was formerly known as 
multiple personality disorder because most descriptions of the syndrome have 
emphasized the diagnostic importance of several alter personalities. One unfor¬ 
tunate consequence of this approach has been a tendency toward public sen¬ 
sationalism and a preoccupation with counting the exact number of alters 
exhibited by any patient. These estimates have occasionally reached prepos¬ 
terous numbers, with some clinicians claiming to see patients who have hun¬ 
dreds of personalities. The dissociative disorders committee for DSM-IV (APA, 
1994) felt strongly that a different approach should be encouraged. The chair¬ 
person of that committee, David Spiegel, explained that “there is a widespread 




80 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


misunderstanding of the essential psychopathology in this dissociative disorder, 
which is failure of integration of various aspects of identity, memory, and con¬ 
sciousness. The problem is not having more than one personality; it is having 
less than one personality” (cited in Hacking, 1995, p. 18). For this reason, the 
name was changed, and it is called dissociative identity disorder (DID) in DSM- 
IV-TR (APA, 2000). 

Dissociative identity disorder is a rare phenomenon. Prior to 1980, fewer 
than 200 or 300 cases had been reported in the professional literature (Pope, 
Barry, Bodkin, & Hudson, 2006). This number is incredibly small compared 
to the millions of patients who suffer from disorders such as schizophrenia and 
depression at any point in time. Some investigators have suggested that DID 
appears more frequently than previously assumed (e.g., Ross, 1997; Sar, 2006), 
but these claims have been disputed (e.g., Lynn, Fassler, Knox, & Lilienfeld, 
2006; Piper & Merskey, 2004). The prevalence of DID in the general population 
is almost certainly much less than 1%. 

DID has attracted considerable attention, partly because a few dramatic 
cases have received widespread publicity through popular books and films. 
These include The Three Faces of Eve (Thigpen & Cleckley, 1957) and Sybil 
(Schreiber, 1973). Sybil was one of the most famous cases in psychiatry during 
the 20th century; interest surrounding the book and the film fueled an enormous 
increase in interest in this fascinating phenomenon throughout the 1970s and 
1980s. The authenticity of the Sybil case has been seriously questioned, how¬ 
ever. Some critics contend that the therapist influenced this patient to adopt alter¬ 
nate personalities by employing different names to identify her varying mood 
states (Rieber, 2006). Unfortunately, for many years, case studies such as these 
were our best source of information about the disorder. A few investigators have 
managed to identify samples of patients with DID for the purpose of research. 
Their descriptions have made significant contributions to the base of knowledge 
that is now available regarding this enigmatic disorder. 

Among the cases of DID that have been reported, a few patterns stand out. 
First, most cases of DID are women, with the ratio of women to men being at 
least five to one. Most DID patients are first assigned that diagnosis in their late 
twenties or early thirties. Many of these people have already received mental 
health services while receiving a different diagnosis, often some type of mood 
disorder, substance-use disorder, schizophrenia, or borderline personality dis¬ 
order (Dorahy, Mills, Taggart, O’Kane, & Mulholland, 2006; Sar, Akyuz, & 
Dogan, 2007). 

DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) lists the following diagnostic criteria for DID: 

1. The subject exhibits two or more distinct identities or personality states 
(each with its own relatively enduring pattern of perceiving, relating to, and 
thinking about the environment and self). 

2 . At least two of these identities or personality states recurrently take control 
of the person’s behavior. 



Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 81 


3 . The subject is unable to recall important personal information that is too 
extensive to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness. 

4 . The disorder is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance 
(such as blackouts or chaotic behavior during alcohol intoxication). 

The manual also notes that the transition between different personalities is 
usually sudden and often beyond voluntary control. 

Memory disturbances are perhaps the most important feature of this disor¬ 
der (Kihlstrom, 2005). Most people behave differently, or may seem to be some¬ 
what different people, as a function of the environmental stimuli with which they 
are confronted, but the changes are seldom as dramatic or complete as those 
seen in cases of DID. Furthermore, very few people forget what they have done 
or who they are whenever they alter their pattern of behavior. In DID, the orig¬ 
inal personality is presumably unaware of the existence of the alters. It is not 
unusual for the person to express concern about large chunks of time that seem 
to be missing or unaccounted for. The alter personalities may, or may not, be 
aware of one another or co-conscious. At any given moment only one personal¬ 
ity is controlling the person’s behavior and interacting with the environment, but 
other personalities may simultaneously perceive, and subsequently remember, 
events that are taking place. Of course, the inability to recall personal informa¬ 
tion is based almost exclusively on self-report. There is a serious need for the 
development of more objective measures of memory impairment in DID (Allen 
& Iacono, 2001; Kong, Allen, & Glisky, 2008). 

The boundaries of this diagnostic category are difficult to define (Gillig, 2009; 
Spiegel, 2001). Some clinicians have argued that it should be considered broadly, 
whereas others would prefer that the term be applied only to severe or classic cases. 
Putnam (2006), author of the most authoritative book on DID (Putnam, 1989), has 
recommended that clinicians make a diagnosis of DID only after they have (a) wit¬ 
nessed a switch between two alter personality states, (b) met a given alter personality 
on at least three separate occasions so that they can evaluate the degree of unique¬ 
ness and stability of the alter personality state, and (c) established that the patient has 
amnesias, either by witnessing amnesic behavior or by the patient’s report. 

Because the disorder is rare and clinicians are not routinely familiar with 
its manifestations, some patients have probably been misdiagnosed as suffering 
from other disorders, most notably schizophrenia and borderline personality dis¬ 
order. Several diagnostic signs might alert a clinician to suspect that a patient 
may be experiencing DID (Greaves, 1980): 

1. Reports of time distortions or time lapses 

2 . Reports of being told of behavioral episodes by others that are not remem¬ 
bered by the patient 

3 . Reports of notable changes in the patient’s behavior by a reliable observer, 
during which time the patient may call himself or herself by different names 
or refer to himself or herself in the third person 

4 . Elicitability of other personalities through hypnosis 



82 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


5. The use of the word “we” in the course of an interview in which the word 
seems to take on a collective meaning rather than an editorial “we” 

6. The discovery of writing, drawings, or other productions or objects among 
the patient’s personal belongings that the patient does not recognize and 
cannot account for 

7. A history of severe headaches, particularly when accompanied by blackouts, 
seizures, dreams, visions, or deep sleep 

Paula exhibited almost all the signs included on this list. Time lapses and 
headaches were a frequent source of concern when she began treatment at 
the student health center. She had been told about incidents that she could not 
remember as far back as high school. Her children and at least one professor 
had noticed marked changes in her behavior that were not easily explained by 
environmental circumstances. It should be emphasized, of course, that none of 
these problems, alone or in combination, can be considered sufficient evidence 
to diagnose DID if the patient does not also meet other specific diagnostic crite¬ 
ria such as those listed in DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000). 


Etiological Considerations 

A variety of hypotheses have been proposed to account for the development of 
DID. One simple explanation is that the patient produces the symptoms vol¬ 
untarily, or plays the role of having several different personalities, in an effort 
to attract attention or avoid responsibility. The intentional production of false 
symptoms is called malingering. A few widely publicized criminal trials in 
which the defendant claimed innocence by reason of insanity have indicated that 
the syndrome can be faked rather convincingly (James, 1998). 

The best-known example of malingering involves the case of Kenneth 
Bianchi, also known as the Hillside Strangler. Several experienced clinicians 
interviewed Bianchi after he was arrested. With the aid of hypnosis, they dis¬ 
covered an alter personality, Steve, who proudly claimed responsibility for sev¬ 
eral brutal rape-murders. The prosecution called Martin Orne, a psychiatrist 
at the University of Pennsylvania, as an expert witness to examine Bianchi. 
Orne raised serious questions about the case by indicating that the defend¬ 
ant was probably faking hypnosis during the interviews and by demonstrating 
that Bianchi’s symptoms changed dramatically as a result of subtle suggestions 
(Orne, Dinges, & Orne, 1984). He proposed that the defendant was faking symp¬ 
toms of DID in an attempt to avoid the death penalty. The court found Orne’s 
skepticism persuasive, and Bianchi was eventually convicted of murder. These 
circumstances are clearly rather extreme; very few patients have such an obvious 
motive for feigning a psychological disorder. Although the Bianchi case should 
not be taken to mean that all patients who exhibit signs of DID are malinger¬ 
ing or faking, it does indicate that therapists should be cautious in evaluating the 



Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 83 


evidence for any diagnostic decision, particularly when the disorder is as diffi¬ 
cult to define and evaluate as DID (Thomas, 2001). 

The sociocognitive model holds that DID is a product of the therapist’s 
influence on the client (Lilienfeld et ah, 1999; Loewenstein, 2006). This is not to 
say that the patient is faking the disorder, but rather that DID patients respond to 
cues that are provided during the course of assessment and treatment. Clinicians 
have frequently noted, for example, that patients with DID are easily hypno¬ 
tized and that the alter personalities are often “discovered” during hypnosis, a 
process that is capable of inducing phenomena such as amnesia, one important 
symptom of dissociative disorders. According to this view, some therapists may 
provide their patients with information and suggestions about DID, subtly and 
unconsciously encouraging them to behave in ways that are consistent with these 
expectations and rewarding them with extra attention and care when they adopt 
the role. In this regard, it is interesting to note that although the vast major¬ 
ity of clinicians work an entire career without seeing a single case of DID, a 
small handful of therapists claim to have treated large numbers of these patients 
(Modestin, 1992). This radically disproportionate distribution of cases is con¬ 
sistent with the hypothesis that some clinicians find (and perhaps encourage the 
development of) symptoms in which they are particularly interested. 

Are all patients with DID simply trying to please their therapists or respond¬ 
ing to subtle suggestions? The sociocognitive model may explain some cases, 
but it does not provide a convincing explanation for many others. The model 
has a number of serious limitations (Gleaves, May, & Cardena, 2001). In many 
cases, important symptoms have been observed before the patient enters treat¬ 
ment. In Paula’s case, the phone call from Sherry (which was the first clear-cut 
evidence of an independent alter personality) occurred before the use of hypno¬ 
sis. Furthermore, most therapists are not looking for DID. Dr. Harpin, for exam¬ 
ple, had never seen a case of this sort before treating Paula. He went out of his 
way to consider other explanations of her behavior before considering the diag¬ 
nosis of DID. 

If DID is, in fact, a genuine psychological phenomenon involving a distur¬ 
bance in consciousness and loss of volitional control, how can we account for 
its development? Current etiological hypotheses focus on two primary consid¬ 
erations: (a) the impact of repeated, overwhelming trauma during childhood— 
especially sexual abuse, and (b) individual differences in the ability to enter 
trancelike states (Forrest, 2001). 

One influential model, proposed by Putnam (1989), starts with the proposi¬ 
tion that the behavior of all human infants (less than 12 months old) is organ¬ 
ized in a series of discrete behavioral states, which are characterized by marked 
contrasts in emotion and behavior. As the child matures, these states become 
more integrated. Transitions among them become less abrupt and increasingly 
subject to voluntary control. Failure to accomplish this integration can set the 
stage for DID. Putnam also assumes that children are able to enter dissociative 



84 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


states spontaneously. Some children may find this process easier than others. 
Those who are adept at it can presumably escape into trances as a way of pro¬ 
tecting themselves from the psychological impact of intense trauma. This mech¬ 
anism allows the child to contain painful memories and emotions outside normal 
conscious awareness. Alter personalities become stronger, more elaborate, and 
solidified as the child repeatedly enters particular dissociative states. The child 
eventually loses control of the process and is unable to stop it or recognize that it 
is happening. DID is the final product of these tragic events. 

The credibility of Putnam’s developmental model rests on a number of 
assumptions. Perhaps most important is the presumed connection between 
repeated traumatic events during childhood, particularly sexual abuse, and 
the subsequent onset of dissociative symptoms. Does the repetition of severe 
trauma lead inevitably to dissociative disorders? Are patients with DID always 
victims of prior sexual abuse? Are patients’ memories always authentic? The 
answers to these questions are open to question (Hacking, 1995; Hornstein 
& Putnam, 1996). Evidence regarding DID is particularly difficult to evalu¬ 
ate because it is based largely on individual cases. Since the 1970s, most pub¬ 
lished cases have involved patients who reported being sexually abused as 
children. Paula is one example. The frequency of such reports has persuaded 
many clinicians that repeated sexual abuse is a necessary and sufficient con¬ 
dition in the etiology of DID. But how do we know that the patients’ memo¬ 
ries are accurate? This is an extremely controversial issue. Efforts to confirm 
patients’ memories of prior abuse meet with mixed results; some can be con¬ 
firmed whereas others cannot (Kluft, 1995; Yeager & Lewis, 1997). Cautious 
skepticism seems to be warranted with regard to the etiological link between 
abuse and DID. 

Treatment 

Most efforts to treat patients with DID have focused on two principal strategies: 
Stabilize the most functional or competent personality, or integrate the disparate 
personalities into one. The former approach was employed initially by Thigpen 
and Cleckley (1957) in treating the patient described in The Three Faces of Eve. 
Follow-up reports on this case, which described the subsequent emergence of 
numerous additional personalities, illustrate the difficulties and possible futility 
of this method. 

Most experts agree that integration is presently the treatment of choice 
(Loewenstein, 2006). Dr. Harpin employed a number of techniques in trying to 
help Paula fuse the various alters. The first step involves facilitating recognition 
by the patient of the existence of alter personalities. One approach might be to 
use videotapes of the alter behavior in an effort to help the patient recognize 
radical changes that are otherwise unknown. It may also be important to help 
patients understand the general nature of the problem as it has appeared in oth¬ 
ers’ lives so that they can gain perspective on their own dilemma. This was the 



Chapter 5 Dissociative Identity Disorder: Multiple Personality 85 


goal that Dr. Harpin had in mind when he asked Paula to read The Three Faces 
of Eve. Fusion may eventually be accomplished if the main personality comes to 
share the memories and emotions of the alters. Finally, the most important step 
involves learning to react to conflict and stress in an adaptive fashion rather than 
engaging in the avoidance behaviors associated with dissociative states (Lynn et 
al., 2006). 

While working toward the process of integration, it is also important that 
the therapist avoid further fragmentation of the patient’s behavior or personal¬ 
ity. Unfortunately, this is a difficult caveat to heed. The existence of independent 
personalities of such different tastes and styles is fascinating, and the thera¬ 
pist is easily tempted to explore and discuss every exotic detail of the patient’s 
experience. Extended and persistent questioning of this sort may encourage 
additional dissociative experiences and impede integration. The use of separate 
names to describe and address alter personalities may also serve to stabilize 
and condone their existence. Finally, although hypnosis can be a useful tool in 
attempting to facilitate the patient’s recall of forgotten events, it can also lead 
to the emergence of additional personalities. None of these problems is easy to 
avoid. They all suggest that therapists who are confronted with patients exhib¬ 
iting symptoms of DID must be extremely cautious in planning their inter¬ 
ventions. They must attend to the unique features of the patient’s dissociative 
experience without ignoring other potentially crucial aspects of the person’s 
problem. 

The outcome of treatment for DID is sometimes very positive. Many 
patients respond well to extensive and prolonged psychological treatment (Brand 
et al., 2009; Maldonado, Butler, & Spiegel, 2002). In that respect, Paula may 
also be a typical case. Optimistic impressions about the prognosis for this disor¬ 
der are based largely on clinical impressions because we do not have data from 
long-term outcome studies with this disorder. One 2-year follow-up study of 54 
patients found that many were substantially improved (Ellason & Ross, 1997). 
Unfortunately, randomized clinical trials comparing the efficacy of treatments 
and placebo programs have not been conducted. The effective ingredients of 
therapy have not been identified. Treatment research in this area is well behind 
that in most other areas of mental-health services. 


Discussion Questions 


1. The initial presentation of DID can be very confusing, both for the patient 
and the therapist. What were the various diagnostic options that Dr. Harpin 
originally considered when he began working with Paula? Why was DID a 
more appropriate diagnosis? 

2. After he had been working with Paula for several years, Dr. Harpin stopped 
asking to talk to her alter personalities by name, preferring instead to address 
only Paula. Should he have adopted that strategy from the beginning of the 




86 


Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


case? Do you think his willingness to talk to her using different names could 
have contributed to the problem? Or did it help him sort out the problem and 
establish a strong working relationship with his client? 

3. Have you seen reports or discussions of DID in the popular media? Why do 
you think some therapists say they have treated dozens of patients with DID 
while the vast majority of mental-health professionals have never seen a sin¬ 
gle case? 

4 . Like patients with PTSD, people with DID have often been the victims of 
serious sexual abuse. How are the symptoms of the two disorders similar? In 
what ways are they different? 



CHAPTER 6 


Major Depressive Disorder 


Janet called the mental-health center to ask if someone could help her 5-year-old 
son, Adam. He had been having trouble sleeping for the past several weeks, and 
Janet was becoming concerned about his health. Adam refused to go to sleep 
at his regular bedtime and also woke up at irregular intervals throughout the 
night. Whenever he woke up, Adam would come downstairs to be with Janet. 
Her initial reaction had been sympathetic, but as the cycle came to repeat itself 
night after night, Janet’s tolerance grew thin, and she became more argumenta¬ 
tive. She found herself engaged in repeated battles that usually ended when she 
agreed to let him sleep in her room. Janet felt guilty about giving in to a 5-year- 
old’s demands, but it seemed like the only way they would ever get any sleep. 
The family physician was unable to identify a physical explanation for Adam’s 
problem; he suggested that Janet contact a psychologist. This advice led Janet to 
inquire about the mental-health center’s series of parent-training groups. 

Applicants for the groups were routinely screened during an individual 
intake interview. The therapist began by asking several questions about Janet 
and her family. Janet was 30 years old and had been divorced from her husband, 
David, for a little more than a year. Adam was the youngest of Janet’s three chil¬ 
dren; Jennifer was 10, and Claire was 8. Janet had resumed her college educa¬ 
tion on a part-time basis when Adam was 2 years old. She had hoped to finish 
her bachelor’s degree at the end of the next semester and enter law school in 
the fall. Unfortunately, she had withdrawn from classes 1 month prior to her 
appointment at the mental-health center. Her current plans were indefinite. She 
spent almost all of her time at home with Adam. 

Janet and the children lived in a large, comfortable house that she had 
received as part of her divorce settlement. Finances were a major concern 
to Janet, but she managed to make ends meet through the combination of stu¬ 
dent loans, a grant-in-aid from the university, and child-support payments from 
David. David lived in a nearby town with a younger woman whom he had mar¬ 
ried shortly after the divorce. He visited Janet and the children once or twice 
every month and took the children to spend weekends with him once a month. 


87 



88 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Having collected the necessary background information, the therapist 
asked for a description of Adam’s sleep difficulties. This discussion covered the 
sequence of a typical evening’s events. It was clear during this discussion that 
Janet felt completely overwhelmed. At several points during the interview, Janet 
was on the verge of tears. Her eyes were watery, and her voice broke as they 
discussed her response to David’s occasional visits. The therapist, therefore, sug¬ 
gested that they put off a further analysis of Adam’s problems and spend some 
time discussing Janet's situation in a broader perspective. 

Janet’s mood had been depressed since her husband had asked for a divorce. 
She felt sad, discouraged, and lonely. This feeling had become even more severe 
just prior to her withdrawal from classes at the university (1 year after David’s 
departure). When David left, she remembered feeling “down in the dumps,” but 
she could usually cheer herself up by playing with the children or going for a 
walk. Now she was nearing desperation. She cried frequently and for long peri¬ 
ods of time. Nothing seemed to cheer her up. She had lost interest in her friends, 
and the children seemed to be more of a burden than ever. Her depression was 
somewhat worse in the morning, when it seemed that she would never be able to 
make it through the day. 

Janet was preoccupied with her divorce from David and spent hours each 
day brooding about the events that led to their separation. These worries inter¬ 
fered considerably with her ability to concentrate and seemed directly related 
to her withdrawal from the university. She had been totally unable to study 
assigned readings or concentrate on lectures. Withdrawing from school precip¬ 
itated further problems. She was no longer eligible for student aid and would 
have to begin paying back her loans within a few months. In short, one problem 
led to another, and her attitude became increasingly pessimistic. 

Janet blamed herself for the divorce, although she also harbored consider¬ 
able resentment toward David and his new wife. She believed that her return to 
school had placed additional strain on an already problematic relationship, and 
she wondered whether she had acted selfishly. The therapist noted that Janet’s 
reasoning about her marriage often seemed vague and illogical. She argued that 
she had been a poor marital partner and cited several examples of her own mis¬ 
conduct. These included events and circumstances that struck the therapist as 
being very common and perhaps expected differences between men and women. 
For example, Janet spent more money than he did on clothes, did not share his 
enthusiasm for sports, and frequently tried to engage David in discussions about 
his personal habits that annoyed her and the imperfections of their relationship. 
Of course, one could easily argue that David had not been sufficiently concerned 
about his own appearance (spending too little effort on his own wardrobe), that 
he had been too preoccupied with sports, and that he had avoided her sincere 
efforts to work on their marital difficulties. But Janet blamed herself. Rather 
than viewing these things as simple differences in their interests and personal¬ 
ities, Janet saw them as evidence of her own failures. She blew these matters 
totally out of proportion until they appeared to her to be terrible sins. Janet also 



Chapter 6 Major Depressive Disorder 89 


generalized from her marriage to other relationships in her life. If her first mar¬ 
riage had failed, how could she ever expect to develop a satisfactory relation¬ 
ship with another man? Furthermore, Janet had begun to question her value as a 
friend and parent. The collapse of her marriage seemed to affect the manner in 
which she viewed all of her social relationships. 

The future looked bleak from her current perspective, but she had not 
given up all hope. Her interest in solving Adam’s problem, for example, was an 
encouraging sign. Although she was not optimistic about the chances of success, 
she was willing to try to become a more effective parent. 

Social History 


Janet was reserved socially when she was a child. She tended to have one or two 
special friends with whom she spent much of her time outside of school, but she 
felt awkward and self-conscious in larger groups of children. This friendship pat¬ 
tern persisted throughout high school. She was interested in boys and dated inter¬ 
mittently until her junior year in high school, when she began to date one boy 
on a regular basis. She and her boyfriend spent all of their time together. Janet 
remembered that the other kids teased them about acting as if they were married. 
Unfortunately, she and her boyfriend broke up during Janet’s first year in college. 

Janet met David a few weeks afterward, and they were married the follow¬ 
ing summer. Janet later wondered whether she had rushed into her relationship 
with David primarily to avoid the vacuum created by her previous boyfriend’s 
sudden exit. Whatever her motivation might have been, her marriage was fol¬ 
lowed shortly by her first pregnancy, which precipitated her withdrawal from the 
university. For the next seven years, Janet was occupied as a full-time mother 
and homemaker. 

When Adam was 2 years old and able to attend a day-care center, Janet 
decided to resume her college education. Her relationship with David became 
increasingly strained. They had even less time than usual to spend with each other. 
David resented his increased household responsibilities. Janet was no longer able 
to prepare meals for the family every night of the week, so David had to learn to 
cook. He also had to share the cleaning and drive the children to many of their 
lessons and social activities. A more balanced and stable relationship would have 
been able to withstand the stress associated with these changes, but Janet and 
David were unable to adjust. Instead of working to improve their communications, 
they bickered continuously. The final blow came when David met another woman 
to whom he was attracted and who offered him an alternative to the escalating hos¬ 
tility with Janet. He asked for a divorce and moved to an apartment. 

Janet was shaken by David’s departure, despite the fact that they had not 
been happy together. Fortunately, she did have a few friends to whom she could 
turn for support. The most important one was a neighbor who had children of 
approximately the same ages as Janet’s daughters. There were also two couples 




90 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


with whom she and David had socialized. They were all helpful for the first 
few weeks, but she quickly lost contact with the couples. It was awkward to get 
together as a threesome, and Janet had never been close enough with the women 
to preserve their relationships on an individual basis. That left the neighbor as 
her sole adviser and confidante, the only person with whom Janet felt she could 
discuss her feelings openly. 

For the next few months, Janet was able to continue her studies. With the 
children’s help, she managed the household chores and kept up with her work. 
She even found time for some brief social activities. She agreed to go out on two 
blind dates arranged by people with whom she and David had been friends. These 
were generally unpleasant encounters; one of her dates was boring and unattrac¬ 
tive, and the other was obnoxiously aggressive. After the latter experience, she 
discontinued the minimal efforts she had made to develop new friendships. 

As time wore on, Janet found herself brooding more and more about the 
divorce. She was gaining weight, and the children began to comment on her 
appearance. To make matters worse, Claire became sick just prior to Janet’s mid¬ 
term exams. The added worry of Claire’s health and her concern about missed 
classes and lost studying time contributed substantially to a decline in Janet’s 
mood. She finally realized that she would have to withdraw from her classes to 
avoid receiving failing grades. 

By this point, 1 month prior to her appointment at the mental-health center, 
she had lost interest in most of her previous activities. Even casual reading had 
come to be a tedious chore. She did not have any hobbies because she never 
had enough time. She also found that her best friend, the neighbor, was becom¬ 
ing markedly aloof. When Janet called, she seldom talked for more than a few 
minutes before finding an excuse to hang up. Their contacts gradually dimin¬ 
ished to an occasional wave across the street or a quick, polite conversation 
when they picked up their children from school. It seemed that her friend had 
grown tired of Janet’s company. 

This was Janet's situation when she contacted the mental-health center. Her 
mood was depressed and anxious. She was preoccupied with financial concerns 
and her lack of social relationships. Adam's sleeping problem, which had begun 
about a week after she withdrew from her classes, was the last straw. She felt 
that she could no longer control her difficult situation and recognized that she 
needed help. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


The therapist and Janet discussed her overall situation and agreed that Adam was 
only a small part of the problem. They decided to work together on an individual 
basis instead of having Janet join the parent-training group. 

Janet’s depression was clearly precipitated by her divorce, which had a dras¬ 
tic impact on many areas of her life. Increased financial burdens were clearly 




Chapter 6 Major Depressive Disorder 91 


part of this picture, but interpersonal relationships were even more meaning¬ 
ful. Although the marriage had been far from ideal in terms of meeting Janet’s 
needs, her relationship with David had been one important part of the way in 
which Janet thought about herself. She had lost one of her most important roles 
(as a wife). The therapist believed that an enduring improvement in her mood 
would depend on her success in developing new relationships and expanded 
roles for herself. And she would eventually need to learn parenting skills that 
would allow her to perform her maternal role more successfully. In other words, 
the therapist adopted a problem-solving approach to Janet’s situation. He was 
particularly concerned about the passive and ruminative way in which she had 
begun to respond to the circumstances in her life. The therapist decided to 
encourage her to engage more actively with her environment while also teaching 
her to perform specific behaviors more effectively. 

As an initial step, the therapist asked Janet to list all the activities that she 
enjoyed. He wanted to shift attention away from the unpleasant factors with 
which Janet was currently preoccupied. Most of the activities Janet mentioned 
were things that she had not done for several months or years. For example, 
prior to her return to school, her favorite pastime had been riding horses. She 
said that she would like to begin riding again, but she felt that it was prohibi¬ 
tively expensive and time consuming. With considerable prodding from the 
therapist, Janet also listed a few other activities. These included talking with 
a friend over a cup of coffee, listening to music late at night after the children 
were asleep, and going for walks in the woods behind her home. In some cases, 
Janet indicated that these activities used to be pleasant, but she did not think that 
they would be enjoyable at the present time. 

Despite Janet’s ambivalence, the therapist encouraged her to pick one activ¬ 
ity that she would try at least twice before their next meeting. A short walk in the 
woods seemed like the most practical alternative, considering that Adam might 
interrupt listening to music and she did not want to call Susan. The therapist also 
asked Janet to call the campus riding club to inquire about their activities. 

At the same time that the therapist encouraged Janet to increase her activ¬ 
ity level, he also began to concentrate on an assessment of her interactions with 
other people. For several sessions, they covered topics such as selecting situa¬ 
tions in which Janet might be likely to meet people with whom she would be 
interested in developing a friendship, initiating a conversation, maintaining a 
conversation by asking the other person a series of consecutive questions, and 
other elementary issues. Having identified areas that were problematic for Janet, 
they discussed solutions and actually practiced, or role-played, various social 
interactions. 

During the first few weeks of treatment, Janet’s mood seemed to be improv¬ 
ing. Perhaps most important was her luck in finding a part-time job at a local rid¬ 
ing stable. She learned of the opening when she called to ask about the campus 
riding club. They were looking for someone who would feed and exercise the 
horses every morning. The wages were low, but she was allowed to ride as long 



92 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


as she wanted each day without charge. Furthermore, the schedule allowed her 
to finish before the girls returned from school. The money also helped her return 
Adam to the day-care center on a part-time basis. Janet still felt depressed when 
she was at home, but she loved to ride, and it helped to know that she would go 
to work in the morning. 

An unfortunate sequence of events led to a serious setback shortly after it 
seemed that Janet’s mood was beginning to improve. Her financial aid had been 
discontinued, and she could no longer cover her monthly mortgage payments. 
Within several weeks, she received a notice from the bank threatening to fore¬ 
close her mortgage and sell her house. Her appearance was noticeably changed 
when she arrived for her next appointment. She was apathetic and lethargic. She 
cried through most of the session, and her outlook had grown distinctly more 
pessimistic. The therapist was particularly alarmed by an incident that Janet 
described as happening the previous day. She had been filling her car with gas 
when a mechanic at the service station mentioned that her muffler sounded like 
it was cracked. He told her that she should get it fixed right away because of the 
dangerous exhaust fumes. In his words, “that’s a good way to kill yourself.” 
The thought of suicide had not occurred to Janet prior to this comment, but she 
found that she could not get it out of her mind. She was frightened by the idea 
and tried to distract herself by watching television. The thoughts continued to 
intrude despite these efforts. 

The therapist immediately discussed several changes in the treatment plan 
with Janet. He arranged for her to consult a psychiatrist, who prescribed fluox¬ 
etine (Prozac), an antidepressant drug. She also agreed to increase the frequency 
of her appointments at the clinic to three times a week. These changes were 
primarily motivated by the onset of suicidal ideation. More drastic action, such 
as hospitalization or calling relatives for additional support, did not seem to be 
necessary because her thoughts were not particularly lethal. For example, she 
said that she did not want to die, even though she was thinking quite a lot about 
death. The idea frightened her, and she did not have a specific plan arranged by 
which she would accomplish her own death. Nevertheless, the obvious deteriora¬ 
tion in her condition warranted a more intense treatment program. 

The next month proved to be a difficult one for Janet, but she was able to 
persevere. Three weeks after she began taking the medication, her mood seemed 
to brighten. The suicidal ideation disappeared, she became more talkative, and 
she resumed most of her normal activities. The people who owned the riding 
stable were understanding and held Janet’s new job for her until she was able 
to return. The financial crisis was solved, at least temporarily, when her father 
agreed to provide her with substantial assistance. In fact, he expressed surprise 
and some dismay that she had never asked him for help in the past or even told 
him that she was in financial trouble. The problem-solving and social skills pro¬ 
gram progressed well after Janet began taking medication. Within several weeks, 
she was able to reestablish her friendship with Susan. She was able to meet a 
few people at the riding stable, and her social network seemed to be widening. 



Chapter 6 Major Depressive Disorder 93 


After Janet’s mood had improved, the issue of Adam’s sleeping problem was 
addressed. The therapist explained that Janet needed to set firm limits on Adam’s 
manipulative behavior. Her inconsistency in dealing with his demands, coupled 
with the attention that he received during the bedtime scene, could be thought of 
as leading to intermittent reinforcement of his inappropriate behavior. Janet and 
the therapist worked out a simple set of responses that she would follow when¬ 
ever he got up and came downstairs. She would offer him a drink, take him back 
to his room, tuck him in bed, and leave immediately. Ten days after the proce¬ 
dure was implemented, Adam began sleeping through the night without inter¬ 
ruption. This rapid success enhanced Janet’s sense of control over her situation. 
Her enthusiasm led her to enroll in the parent-training program for which she had 
originally applied. She continued to improve her relationship with her children. 

Janet’s individual therapy sessions were discontinued 9 months after her 
first appointment. At that point, she was planning to return to school, was still 
working part time at the riding stable, and had started to date one of the men she 
met at work. Her children were all healthy, and she had managed to keep their 
house. She continued to take antidepressant medication. 


Discussion 


A sad or dysphoric mood is obviously the most prominent feature of clini¬ 
cal depression. Depressed patients describe themselves as feeling discouraged, 
hopeless, and apathetic. This dejected emotional state is usually accompanied by 
a variety of unpleasant thoughts that may include suicidal ideation. These cog¬ 
nitive features of depression are sometimes called the depressive triad: a nega¬ 
tive view of the self, the world, and the future. Depressed people see themselves 
as inadequate and unworthy. They are often filled with guilt and remorse over 
apparently ordinary and trivial events. These patients hold a similarly dim view 
of their environment. Everyday experiences and social interactions are inter¬ 
preted in the most critical fashion. The future seems bleak and empty. In fact, 
some extremely depressed patients find it impossible to imagine any future at all. 

Clinical depression is identified by changes in several important areas in 
the person’s life. In addition to a prominent and relatively persistent dysphoric 
mood, DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, p. 356) lists several features for major depres¬ 
sive episodes. Specifically, at least five of the following symptoms must have 
been present nearly every day for at least 2 weeks if the patient is to meet the 
criteria for this diagnostic category: 

1. Depressed mood most of the day 

2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities 
most of the day 

3. Significant weight loss (when not dieting) or weight gain, or decrease or 
increase in appetite 




94 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


4 . Insomnia or hypersomnia (prolonged sleep) 

5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation 

6. Fatigue or loss of energy 

7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (not merely 
self-reproach or guilt about being sick) 

8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness 

9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal idea¬ 
tion without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for com¬ 
mitting suicide 

Janet clearly fit these criteria. Her mood had been markedly depressed since 
her separation from David. She had gained considerable weight—25 pounds in 9 
months. Her concentration was severely impaired, as evidenced by her inability 
to study and her loss of interest in almost everything. Excessive and inappro¬ 
priate guilt was clearly a prominent feature of her constant brooding about the 
divorce. Although she did not actually attempt to harm herself, she experienced 
a distressing period of ruminative suicidal ideation. Sleep impairment may also 
have been a problem, but it was difficult to evaluate in the context of Adam’s 
behavior. Prior to her first visit at the clinic, Janet had been sleeping less than her 
usual number of hours per night, and she reported considerable fatigue. It was 
difficult to know whether she would have been able to sleep if Adam had not 
been so demanding of her attention throughout the night. 

Most therapists agree that it is important to recognize the difference 
between clinical depression and other states of unhappiness and disappointment. 
Consider, for example, people who are mourning the loss of a friend or relative. 
DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) suggests that a diagnosis of a major depressive episode 
should be made only if bereavement persists for more than 2 months (assuming 
that the person meets the diagnostic criteria for this condition). Is this a quali¬ 
tative or a quantitative distinction? Are patients who might be considered clini¬ 
cally depressed simply more unhappy than their peers, or are these phenomena 
completely distinct? This is one of the most interesting and difficult questions 
facing investigators in the field of mood disorders. The present diagnostic system 
handles the problem by including an intermediate category, dysthymia, which 
lies between major depressive disorder and normal mood. This category includes 
patients who exhibit chronic depressed symptoms that are not of sufficient sever¬ 
ity to meet the criteria for major mood disorder. 


Etiological Considerations 

Several psychological models have been proposed to account for the develop¬ 
ment of major depression. Each model focuses on somewhat different features of 
depressive disorders (e.g., interpersonal relations, inactivity, or self-deprecating 
thoughts), but most share an interest in the role of negative or stressful events in 
the precipitation of major depression. 



Chapter 6 Major Depressive Disorder 95 


Freud’s explanation for the development of depression began with a com¬ 
parison between depression and bereavement (Freud, 1917, 1925). The two 
conditions are similar. Both involve a dejected mood, a loss of interest in the 
outside world, and an inhibition of activity. One principal feature distinguishes 
between the person who is depressed and the person who is mourning: a distur¬ 
bance of self-regard. Depressed people chastise themselves, saying that they are 
worthless, morally depraved, and worthy of punishment. Freud noted the dispar¬ 
ity between such extreme negative views and the more benign opinions of other 
people who do not hold the depressed person in such contempt. In other words, 
the depressed person's view does not seem to be an accurate self-perception. 
Freud went on to argue that depressed people are not really complaining about 
themselves but are, in fact, expressing hostile feelings that pertain to someone 
else. Depression is therefore the manifestation of a process in which anger is 
turned inward and directed against the self instead of against its original object. 

Why would some people direct hostility against themselves? Freud argued 
that the foundation for this problem is laid in early childhood. For various rea¬ 
sons, people who are prone to depression have formed dependent interpersonal 
relationships. This dependency fosters frustration and hostility. Because these 
negative feelings might threaten the relationship if they are expressed openly, 
they are denied awareness. Problems then arise when the relationship is ended, 
for whatever reason. The depressed person’s ego presumably identifies with the 
lost loved one. The intense hostility that had been felt for that person is now 
turned against the self, or introjected. Following this model, treatment would con¬ 
sist of an attempt to make the client aware of these unconscious, hostile impulses. 
Their more direct expression would presumably eliminate the depression. 

At least one aspect of this model seems consistent with Janet’s situation. 
She had, in fact, formed a series of intense, dependent relationships with men, 
beginning in high school. One might argue that her depression was precipitated 
by the loss incurred during her separation and divorce from David. She resented 
the separation deeply. Her guilt might be seen as a criticism of David’s behavior. 
Other aspects of Janet’s behavior, however, are inconsistent with Freud’s model. 
Although Janet was critical of herself, she was also quite vocal in David’s pres¬ 
ence. They fought openly several times, both before and after the divorce, and 
he was fully aware of Janet’s anger and resentment. It therefore seems unlikely 
that Janet’s depression was a simple manifestation of misdirected hostility. It is 
also unlikely that her depression would be relieved by simply encouraging her to 
express her feelings more openly. 

More recent attempts to explain the development of depression in psycho¬ 
logical terms have borrowed and extended various aspects of Freud’s psycho¬ 
analytic model. One important consideration involves his observation that the 
onset of depression is often preceded by a dependent personality style and then 
precipitated by the loss of an important relationship. Personality factors and rela¬ 
tional distress may help to explain the fact that women are twice as likely as 
men to develop major depression. Dependent people base their self-esteem on 



96 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


acceptance and approval by others. Some authors have suggested that, through¬ 
out their social development, women are frequently taught to think this way 
about themselves (Crick & Zahn-Waxier, 2003; Gilligan, 1982). Stereotypes 
of female roles include descriptions of personality traits such as being passive, 
dependent, and emotional (whereas men are presumably more often encour¬ 
aged to be aggressive, autonomous, and rational). An extension of this hypoth¬ 
esis holds that women are more likely than men to define themselves in terms of 
their relationships with other people. Women would then presumably be more 
distressed by marital difficulties and divorce. In Janet’s case, the loss of her rela¬ 
tionship with David was certainly an important consideration in the onset of 
her depression. Her sense of self-worth was severely threatened by the divorce, 
despite the fact that her marriage had been far from ideal. 

Stressful life events play a causal role in the etiology of depression 
(Harkness et ah, 2010; Monroe & Harkness, 2005). One classic study has 
received considerable attention because it led to the development of a model 
that begins to explain the relationship between environmental conditions and 
the onset of depression. Brown and Harris (1978) found an increased incidence 
of stressful events in the lives of depressed women but only with regard to a 
particular subset of such events—those that were severe and involved long-term 
consequences for the woman’s well-being. Divorce and marital separation were 
prominent among these events, which also included events such as illness, loss 
of a job, and many other types of personal adversity. The impact of a stress¬ 
ful event apparently depends on the meaning that the event has for the person. 
Severe events that occur in the context of ongoing difficulties (such as a chroni¬ 
cally distressed marriage) and events that occur in areas of a woman’s life to 
which she is particularly committed (such as a child’s health or the development 
of a career) are most likely to lead to the onset of depression (Brown, 2002). 

The association between stressful life events and depression is apparently 
bidirectional. Stress may cause depression, but depression also causes stress. In 
comparison to women who are not depressed and women with medical disor¬ 
ders, depressed women generate higher levels of stress, especially in interper¬ 
sonal relationships such as marriage (Hammen, 2005). This result indicates the 
operation of a dynamic process. Stressors that are not related to the person’s own 
behavior may precipitate the onset of a depressed mood. The depressed person 
may then engage in maladaptive ways of coping with the immediate situation, 
and these dysfunctional behaviors may lead to even higher levels of stress. 

Several of these concepts are consistent with Janet’s situation. She had 
clearly experienced a high level of stress in the months before she entered ther¬ 
apy. The divorce from David is one obvious example. Her difficulties with the 
children may be another instance. When Claire’s illness eventually forced her to 
withdraw from the university, there were important long-term consequences for 
her graduation and subsequent plans to enter law school. 

Stressful life events are likely to precipitate depression, particularly in the 
absence of adequate social support. The manner in which these experiences 



Chapter 6 Major Depressive Disorder 97 


combine to take their effect, however, is currently a matter of dispute and specu¬ 
lation. It is important to remember that most people experience stressful events 
at one time or another, but most people do not become seriously depressed. 
What factors make some people more psychologically vulnerable? Do people 
who are prone to depression respond differently than others to the problems of 
everyday life? Are they less likely than other people to establish or maintain a 
protective social support network? These questions have been addressed by other 
etiological models. 

Social-learning theorists (Joiner, Coyne, & Blalock, 1999) also emphasize 
the importance of interpersonal relationships and social skills (cf. narcissism and 
dependence) in the onset and maintenance of depression. This model provides 
an interesting account of the way in which depressed people respond to stress¬ 
ful life events and the effect that these responses have on other people. Others 
respond empathically and are initially attentive when the depressed person talks 
about depressing experiences, yet, the long-range result of this process is usually 
negative. The depressed person’s few remaining friends eventually become tired 
of this behavior and begin to avoid further interactions. Whatever sources of 
social support may have been available are eventually driven away. One impor¬ 
tant factor in this regard is a deficit in social skills. Depressed people may be 
ineffective in their interactions with other people. An important aspect of treat¬ 
ment would therefore be to identify specific skills in which the person is defi¬ 
cient and to teach the person more effective ways of interacting with others. 

Several aspects of this model are consistent with the present case. After her 
separation from David, Janet had become isolated. Her long discussions with 
her neighbor had eventually soured their relationship and eliminated one of her 
last sources of social support. When Janet and her therapist discussed things that 
she might do to meet new friends, she seemed lost. The few attempts that she 
had made, such as her blind dates, had gone badly, and she did not know where 
else to begin. 

Another consideration in social-learning views of depression involves the way 
in which people respond to the onset of a depressed mood. Some people try 
to distract themselves from negative emotions by becoming involved in some 
activity. Others respond in a more passive fashion and tend to ruminate about 
the sources of their distress. Nolen-Hoeksema (2002) proposed that people who 
respond in a passive, ruminative way experience longer and more severe periods 
of depression. She also suggested that this factor may account for gender differ¬ 
ences in the prevalence of depression because women are more likely than men 
to employ this response style. Janet’s behavior following her divorce fits nicely 
with Nolen-Hoeksema’s conceptual framework. Although Janet initially tried 
to cope actively with her various problems, she soon relinquished most of her 
efforts to find new friends or to keep up with her studies. She frequently found 
herself brooding about the divorce and the hopeless nature of her circumstances. 
Her therapist encouraged Janet to engage more frequently in pleasant activities 
in an effort to break this cycle of passive, ruminative behavior. 



98 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


In addition to the social and behavioral aspects of depression, it is also 
important to consider the way in which depressed people perceive or interpret 
events in their environment. What do they think about themselves and things 
that happen in their world? More specifically, how do they explain the experi¬ 
ence of negative events? Cognitive perspectives suggest that patterns of thinking 
and perception play a prominent role in the development of depression (Gotlib 
& Joormann, 2010; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005). According to one influential 
theory, the occurrence of negative life events may lead to the development of 
hopelessness, which in turn causes the onset of symptoms of depression (Alloy, 
Abramson, Walshaw, & Neeren, 2006). Two cognitive elements define the state 
of hopelessness: (a) the expectation that highly desired outcomes will not occur 
or that highly aversive outcomes will occur, and (b) the belief that the person 
cannot do anything (is helpless) to change the likelihood that these events will 
occur. 

Why do some people become hopeless after negative experiences whereas 
others do not? The theory holds that the likelihood of developing hopelessness 
will depend on the person’s inferences regarding three factors: the cause of the 
event, the consequences of the event, and the implications of the event with 
regard to the self. For example, hopeless depression is likely to occur if the per¬ 
son views a negative event as being important and also attributes the event to 
factors that are enduring (stable) and likely to affect many outcomes (global). 
The theory also recognizes that the perceived consequences of the negative event 
may be as important as inferred causes. If the person views the negative conse¬ 
quences of the event as important, persistent, and wide ranging, depression will 
be more likely to develop than if the consequences are viewed as unimportant, 
short lived, or limited in scope. The third and final consideration involves nega¬ 
tive inferences about the self. Depression is a more likely outcome if the person 
interprets a negative event to mean that she or he is a less able, worthy, or desir¬ 
able person. 

Depressed people do express an inordinately high proportion of negative 
statements about themselves and how they relate to the world. Janet's interpreta¬ 
tion of the events leading up to and surrounding her divorce fit with the hope¬ 
lessness theory. She believed that the disintegration of her marriage was her 
own fault rather than David's; she argued that her failure in that relationship was 
characteristic of her interactions with all other men rather than specific to one 
person; and she maintained that she would never be able to change this pattern 
of behavior. 

Treatment 

Janet’s treatment involved a combination of psychotherapy and antidepres¬ 
sant medication. Following the social learning/interpersonal model, her thera¬ 
pist focused on increasing Janet’s activity level and helping her learn new 
social skills. By encouraging activities such as riding, the therapist hoped to 



Chapter 6 Major Depressive Disorder 99 


interrupt and reverse the ongoing, interactive process in which social isolation, 
rumination, and inactivity led to increased depression, depression led to fur¬ 
ther withdrawal, and so on. Through the development of new response patterns, 
particularly those involving interpersonal communication and parenting skills, 
he hoped to enable Janet to deal more effectively with future stressful events. 
Increased social activity and more effective communication would also lead to 
a more supportive social network that might help reduce the impact of stressful 
events. Recent evidence suggests that behavioral activation—increasing pleasant 
activities and positive interactions with others—is one effective approach to the 
treatment of depression (Lejuez, Hopko, Acierno, Daughters, & Pagoto, 2011; 
Mazzuccelli, Kane, & Rees, 2009). 

The therapy that Janet received was, in many respects, similar to another 
psychological approach to treating depression that is known as interpersonal 
psychotherapy, or 1PT (Mufson et ah, 2004; Weissman, 2007). The focus of 
IPT is the connection between depressive symptoms and current interpersonal 
problems. Relatively little attention is paid to long-standing personality prob¬ 
lems or developmental issues. The treatment takes a practical, problem-solving 
approach to resolving the sorts of daily conflicts in close relationships that can 
exacerbate and maintain depression. Deficits in social skills are addressed in an 
active and supportive fashion. The depressed person is also encouraged to pur¬ 
sue new activities that might take the place of relationships or occupational roles 
that have been lost. Therapy sessions often include nondirective discussions of 
social difficulties and unexpressed or unacknowledged negative emotions as well 
as role-playing to practice specific social skills. 

Antidepressant medication was introduced when the risk of suicide became 
apparent. Janet’s suicidal ideation was not extremely lethal. She had not planned 
a particular method by which she might end her life, and she reported that 
the idea of harming herself was frightening. The risk would have been much 
greater if she did have more specific plans and if she had really wanted to die. 
Nevertheless, her morbid ruminations marked a clear deterioration in her con¬ 
dition that called for more intensive treatment. Three general classes of drugs 
are useful in the treatment of depression: selective serotonin reuptake inhibi¬ 
tors (SSRIs), tricyclics (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors. 
Improvements in the patient’s mood and other specific affective symptoms are 
typically evident after 2 to 4 weeks of drug treatment. Their continued adminis¬ 
tration also reduces the probability of symptomatic relapse. 

Janet was given fluoxetine (Prozac), which is an SSRI. Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors were developed in the 1980s and now account for most pre¬ 
scriptions written for antidepressant medication (Hameed, Schwartz, Malhotra, 
West, & Bertone, 2005; Hirschfeld, 2001). Additional examples of SSRIs 
include fluvoxamine (Luvox), sertraline (Zoloft), and paroxetine (Paxil). The 
SSRIs inhibit the reuptake of serotonin into the presynaptic nerve ending and 
therefore increase the amount of serotonin available in the synaptic cleft. SSRIs 
have fewer side effects (such as weight gain, constipation, and drowsiness) than 



100 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


TCAs or MAO inhibitors; they are easier to take (one pill a day instead of exper¬ 
imenting for weeks to find the proper dosage); and they are less dangerous if the 
patient takes an overdose. This does not mean that they are without side effects 
of their own. Some patients experience nausea, headaches, fatigue, restlessness, 
and sexual side effects such as difficulty in reaching orgasm. Controlled out¬ 
come studies indicate that Prozac and other SSRls are at least as effective as tra¬ 
ditional forms of antidepressant medication (Kroenke et al., 2001). Medication 
and psychotherapy are both effective forms of treatment for people who suffer 
from major depression (Hollon, Thase, & Markowitz, 2002). 

One obvious disadvantage associated with both medication and psycho¬ 
therapy is the extended delay involved in achieving therapeutic effects. In the 
face of a serious suicidal threat, for example, the therapist may not be able to 
wait several weeks for a change in the patient’s adjustment. Also, many patients 
do not respond positively to medication or psychosocial treatment approaches. 
Another form of intervention that may be tried with depressed patients, particu¬ 
larly if they exhibit profound motor retardation and have failed to respond posi¬ 
tively to antidepressant medication, is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). In the 
standard ECT procedure, a brief seizure is induced by passing an electrical cur¬ 
rent between two electrodes that have been placed over the patient’s temples. 
A full course of treatment generally involves the induction of six to eight sei¬ 
zures spaced at 48-hour intervals. The procedure was first introduced as a treat¬ 
ment for schizophrenia, but it soon became apparent that it was most effective 
with depressed patients. Many studies have supported this conclusion (Husain, 
Kevan, Linnell, & Scott, 2004). 

Much of the controversy surrounding ECT is based on misconceptions con¬ 
cerning the procedure and its effects. Although it is often referred to as “shock 
therapy,” ECT does not involve the perception of an electrical current. In fact, a 
short-acting anesthetic is administered prior to the seizure so that the patient is 
not conscious when the current is applied. Many of the deleterious side effects 
of ECT have been eliminated by modifications in the treatment procedure, 
such as the use of muscle relaxants to avoid bone fractures during the seizure 
(Abrams, 2002). The extent and severity of memory loss can be greatly reduced 
by the use of unilateral electrode placement. If both electrodes are placed over 
the nondominant hemisphere of the patient’s brain, the patient can experience less 
verbal memory impairment, but the treatment may be less effective in terms of 
its antidepressant results. There is, of course, the serious question of permanent 
changes in brain structure and function. Some critics of ECT have argued that 
it produces irreversible neurological impairment. Proponents of ECT maintain 
that the evidence for this conclusion is inadequate (Abrams, 2002). Most of the 
objections to the use of ECT are based on misconceptions. The evidence sup¬ 
porting its therapeutic efficacy seems to justify the continued use of ECT with 
some severely depressed patients who have not responded to less-intrusive forms 
of treatment. 



Chapter 6 Major Depressive Disorder 101 


Discussion Questions 


1. Patients who are experiencing serious suicidal thoughts are frequently hospi¬ 
talized involuntarily. What are the advantages and disadvantages of forcing 
people to be hospitalized against their will? 

2. Janet had experienced a series of stressful events and circumstances. Would 
anyone have become depressed if they were in the same situation? If not, 
what other factors might have combined with these stressful events to lead to 
her depression? 

3. From the beginning of therapy, the psychologist encouraged Janet to become 
more actively involved in various pleasant activities. Do you think treatment 
would have been even more effective if they had initially spent more time 
discussing at length the sources of her distress (such as her feelings about her 
divorce)? 

4 . Imagine that one of your close relatives has been depressed for several years. 
The person has not responded to previous forms of treatment (both medication 
and psychotherapy) and is now talking about committing suicide. Would you 
be willing to authorize a series of ECT for your relative? Why or why not? 




CHAPTER 7 


Bipolar Disorder 


By the time he was admitted to the hospital, George Lawler was talking a mile a 
minute. He harangued the other patients and ward staff, declaring that he was the 
coach of the U.S. Olympic track team and offering to hold tryouts for the other 
patients in the hospital. His movements were rapid and somewhat erratic as he 
paced the halls of the ward and explored every room. At the slightest provoca¬ 
tion, he flew into a rage. When an attendant blocked his entrance to the nursing 
station, he threatened to report her to the president of the Olympic committee. 
He had not slept for 3 nights. His face was covered with a stubbly growth of 
beard, and his hair was scattered in various directions. His eyes were sunken and 
bloodshot, but they still gleamed with an intense excitement. 

His life had taken a drastic change over the past 2 weeks. George was 35 
years old, married, and the father of two young children. He worked at a small 
junior college where he taught physical education and coached both the men’s 
and women’s track teams. Until his breakdown, the teams had been having 
an outstanding season. They were undefeated in dual competition and heavy 
favorites to win the conference championship. The campus was following their 
accomplishments closely because it had been many years since one of the school 
teams had won a championship. In fact, track was the only sport in which the 
school had a winning record that season. 

This was not the first time that George had experienced psychological prob¬ 
lems. His first serious episode had occurred during his junior year in college. It 
did not seem to be triggered by any particular incident; in fact, things had been 
going well. George was playing defensive back on the university football team. 
He was in good academic standing and fairly popular with the other students. 
Nevertheless, during the spring semester, George found that he was losing inter¬ 
est in everything. It was not surprising that he did not look forward to classes or 
studying. He had never been an outstanding student. But he noticed that he no 
longer enjoyed going out with his friends. They said he seemed depressed all 
the time. George said he just did not care anymore. He began avoiding his girl¬ 
friend, and when they were together, he found fault with almost everything she 


102 



Chapter 7 Bipolar Disorder 103 


did. Most of his time was spent in his apartment in front of the television. It did 
not seem to matter what program he watched because his concentration was seri¬ 
ously impaired. He kept the TV on as a kind of distraction, not as entertainment. 
When he did not show up for spring football practice, the coach called him to his 
office for a long talk. George told his coach that he did not have the energy to 
play football. In fact, he did not feel he could make it through the easiest set of 
drills. He did not care about the team or about his future in sports. Recognizing 
that George’s problem was more than a simple lack of motivation, the coach per¬ 
suaded him to visit a friend of his—a psychiatrist at the student health clinic. 
George began taking antidepressant medication and attending individual coun¬ 
seling sessions. Within several weeks, he was back to his normal level of func¬ 
tioning, and treatment was discontinued. 

George had also experienced periods of unusual ambition and energy. As a 
student, he had frequently spent several days cramming for exams at the end of 
a semester. Many of his friends took amphetamines to stay awake, but George 
seemed able to summon endless, internal reserves of energy. In retrospect, these 
periods seemed to be hypomanic episodes (i.e., periods of increased energy 
that are not sufficiently severe to qualify as full-blown mania). At the time, 
these episodes went relatively unnoticed. George’s temporary tendency toward 
excess verbosity, his lack of need for sleep, and his ambitious goals did not seem 
pathological. In fact, his energetic intervals were productive, and his behavioral 
excesses were probably adaptive in the competitive university environment. 

There had been two subsequent episodes of depression with symptoms that 
were similar to those of the first episode. The most recent incident had occurred 
8 months prior to his current hospitalization. It was September, 2 weeks after the 
start of the fall semester. George had been worried about his job and the team 
all summer. Who would replace his star sprinter who had transferred to the state 
university? Would his high jumper get hurt during the football season? Could 
they improve on last year’s winning record? Over the past month, these con¬ 
cerns had become constant and consuming. George was having trouble getting 
to sleep; he was also waking up in the middle of the night for no apparent rea¬ 
son. He felt tired all the time. His wife and children noticed that he was always 
brooding and seemed preoccupied. Then came the bad news. First, the athletic 
department told him that he would not get an increase in travel funds, which 
he had expected. Then he learned that one of his assistant coaches was taking a 
leave of absence to finish working on her degree. Neither of these events would 
have a drastic effect on the upcoming season, but George took them to be disas¬ 
ters. His mood changed from one of tension and anxiety to severe depression. 
Over several days, George became more and more lethargic until he was almost 
completely unresponsive. His speech was slow and, when he did say more than 
a word or two, he spoke in a dull monotone. Refusing to get out of bed, he alter¬ 
nated between long hours of sleep and staring vacuously at the ceiling. He called 
the athletic director and quit his job, pointing to minor incidents as evidence of 
his own incompetence. He believed, for example, that the assistant coach had 



104 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


quit because of a brief argument that he had had with her 6 months earlier. In 
fact, they had a positive relationship, and she had always planned to return to 
school at one time or another. She was leaving earlier than she had expected 
for personal reasons. George seemed to be blaming himself for everything. He 
apologized profusely to his wife and children for failing them as a husband and 
father. His despair seemed genuine. Suicide appeared to be the only reasonable 
solution. He threatened to end it all if his family would only leave him alone. 

George’s wife, Cheryl, called the psychiatrist who had treated him during 
his last episode (2 years earlier) and arranged a special appointment. The psy¬ 
chiatrist decided to prescribe lithium carbonate, a drug that is used to treat manic 
episodes but that is also an effective antidepressant with bipolar patients (those 
who show both manic and depressed phases of disturbance). Although George 
had never been hospitalized for a manic episode, the psychiatrist suggested 
that his past history of “maniclike” behavior (increased energy, sleeplessness, 
inflated self-esteem, and so on) and his positive family history for bipolar disor¬ 
der (his uncle Ralph) were both consistent with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder. 
The lithium seemed to be effective. Three weeks later, George was back at work. 
Maintenance doses of lithium were prescribed in an attempt to reduce the fre¬ 
quency and severity of future mood swings. 

His first fully developed manic period began suddenly near the end of the 
next spring track season. The team was having a good year, and a few team mem¬ 
bers had turned in remarkable individual performances. Two days before the con¬ 
ference meet, Cheryl noticed that George was behaving strangely. There was a 
driven quality about his preparation for the meet. He was working much longer 
hours and demanding more from the athletes. When he was home, he talked end¬ 
lessly about the team, bragging about its chances for national recognition and 
planning intricate strategies for particularly important events. Cheryl was worried 
about this change in George’s behavior, but she attributed it to the pressures of his 
job and assured herself that he would return to normal when the season was over. 

George was clearly losing control over his own behavior. The following 
incident, which occurred on the day of the conference meet, illustrates the dra¬ 
matic quality of his disturbance. While the men’s team was dressing in the locker 
room prior to taking the field, George paced rapidly up and down the aisles, ges¬ 
turing emphatically and talking at length about specific events and the virtues 
of winning. When the men were all in uniform, George gathered them around 
his own locker. Without Cheryl’s knowledge, he had removed a ceremonial 
sword from their fireplace mantel and brought it with him that morning. He drew 
the sword from his locker and leaped up on a bench in the midst of the men. 
Swinging the sword above his head, he began chanting the school’s fight song. 
The athletes joined in, and he led them out onto the field screaming and shak¬ 
ing their fists in the air. A reporter for the school newspaper later described the 
incident as the most inspirational pregame performance he had ever seen in a 
locker room. Without question, the team was driven to an exceptional emotional 
peak, and it did go on to win the meet by a huge margin. In fact, George was 



Chapter 7 Bipolar Disorder 105 


later given the school’s annual coaching award. His behavior prior to the meet 
was specifically cited as an example of his outstanding leadership qualities. 
Unfortunately, the action was also another manifestation of psychopathology 
and a signal of further problems that would soon follow. 

George did not return home after the meet. He stayed in his office, working 
straight through the night in preparation for the regional meet. Cheryl was finally 
able to locate him by phoning his friend who worked in the office next door. 
She and his colleagues tried to persuade him to slow down, but he would not 
listen. The next morning George was approached by a reporter from the school 
newspaper. Here, George thought, was the perfect opportunity to expound on his 
ability as a coach and to publicize his exciting plans for future competition. The 
interview turned into a grandiose tirade, with George rambling uninterrupted for 
3 hours. The reporter could neither interrupt nor extract himself from this unex¬ 
pected and embarrassing situation. 

The interview turned into a professional disaster for George. Among other 
things, George boasted that he was going to send the star high jumper from the 
women’s team to the NCAA national meet in Oregon. He planned to go along 
as her chaperone and said that he would pay for their trip out of the proceeds 
of a recent community fund-raising drive. This announcement was startling 
in two regards. First, the money in question had been raised with the athletic 
department’s assurance that it would be used to improve the college’s track 
facilities and to sponsor running clinics for local children. George did not have 
the authority to redirect the funds. His announcement was certain to anger the 
business leaders who had organized the drive. Second, the prospect of a married 
male coach chaperoning a female athlete, who also happened to be quite attrac¬ 
tive, promised to raise a minor scandal in their small, conservative community. 
Recognizing the sensitive nature of these plans, the reporter asked George if he 
might want to reconsider his brash announcement. George replied—asking the 
reporter to quote him—that it was not every year that he had the opportunity to 
take a free trip with a pretty girl, and he was not about to pass it up. He added 
that this might blossom into a genuine romance. 

The article appeared, along with a picture of George, on the front page of 
the school paper the next morning. His disheveled appearance and outrageous 
remarks raised an instant furor in the athletic department and the school admin¬ 
istration. The head of the department finally located George in his office making 
a series of long-distance calls. The director demanded an explanation and imme¬ 
diately found himself in the midst of an ear-shattering shouting match. George 
claimed that he had just been named head coach of the Olympic track team. He 
was now calling potential assistant coaches and athletes around the country to 
organize tryouts for the following month. Any interference, he claimed, would 
be attributed to foreign countries that were reluctant to compete against a team 
led by a coach with such a distinguished record. 

The department head realized that George was not kidding and that he could 
not reason with him. He returned to his own office and phoned Cheryl. When 



106 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


she arrived, they were unable to convince George that he needed help. They 
eventually realized that their only option was to call the police, who then took 
George to a psychiatric hospital. Following an intake evaluation, George was 
committed for 3 days of observation. Because he did not recognize the severity 
of his problems and refused to cooperate with his family and the hospital staff, 
it was necessary to follow an involuntary commitment procedure. The commit¬ 
ment order was signed by a judge on the following day, after a hospital psychia¬ 
trist testified in court that George might be dangerous to himself or others. 


Social History 


In most respects, George’s childhood was unremarkable. He grew up in a small, 
midwestern town where his father taught history and coached the high school 
football team. He had one older brother and two younger sisters. All of the chil¬ 
dren were fair-to-average students and very athletic. George loved all sports and 
excelled at most. When he accepted a football scholarship to the state university, 
everyone expected him to go on to play professional ball. 

He was always popular with his peers. They looked to him for leadership, 
and he seemed to enjoy the role. He and his friends were mischievous but were 
never serious discipline problems. Although some of his friends began drinking 
alcohol during high school, George always refused to join them. His father had 
been a heavy drinker, and he did not want to follow the same path. After several 
years of problem drinking, George’s father had joined Alcoholics Anonymous 
and remained sober. Everyone agreed that the change in his behavior was 
remarkable, 

George’s uncle (his mother’s brother) had also experienced serious adjust¬ 
ment problems. This uncle was several years older than George’s mother, and 
the principal incidents occurred before George was born. George was therefore 
uncertain of the details, but he had been told that his uncle was hospitalized twice 
following periods of rather wild behavior. A later search of hospital records con¬ 
firmed that these had, in fact, been maniclike episodes. Although the uncle had 
been assigned a diagnosis of “acute schizophrenic reaction,” contemporary diag¬ 
nostic criteria would certainly have required a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


When George was admitted to the hospital, he was clearly out of control. He was 
racing in high gear despite the fact that he had not slept for several days. He 
was nearing a state of physical exhaustion. The psychiatrist immediately prescribed 
a moderate dosage of haloperidol (Haldol), an antipsychotic drug that is also 
used to treat schizophrenia. George was supposed to have been taking lithium 





Chapter 7 Bipolar Disorder 107 


carbonate prior to the onset of the episode, but a check of his blood-lithium level 
indicated that he had not been following the prescribed procedure. He was there¬ 
fore started on a dose of 900 mg of lithium on the first day. This was increased 
to 1,800 mg per day over the next 2 weeks. The hospital nursing staff took blood 
tests every third day to ensure that the blood lithium level did not exceed 1.4 
milliequivalents per liter—the point at which toxic effects might be expected. 
After 3 weeks, the Haldol was discontinued, and George continued to receive 
maintenance doses of lithium (2,100 mg per day). 

George and Cheryl were, once again, given specific instructions pertaining 
to the potential hazards of taking lithium. The importance of a proper diet, and 
particularly a normal level of salt intake, was stressed. They were also told about 
the early warning signs of lithium intoxication (e.g., nausea, gastrointestinal dis¬ 
tress, muscular weakness), so that they could warn George’s psychiatrist if the 
dosage needed to be reduced. 

In addition, George was involved in a number of other therapeutic activities. 
He and the other patients on the ward met daily for sessions of group psycho¬ 
therapy. There were also several recreational and occupational activities that the 
patients could choose according to their own interests. Visits by family members 
and close friends were encouraged during the evening hours. When George’s 
behavior improved, he was taken off restricted status and allowed to leave the 
ward for short periods of time. 

George was discharged from the hospital after 3 weeks. His behavior had 
improved dramatically. The first few days in the hospital had been difficult for 
everyone concerned. He had been so excited that the entire ward routine had 
been disrupted. Mealtimes were utterly chaotic, and when the patients were 
supposed to go to sleep for the night, George shouted and ran around like a 
child going to his first slumber party. The physical exertion finally took its toll. 
He fell into a state of nearly complete exhaustion. After sleeping for the better 
part of 3 days, George’s demeanor was somewhat more subdued. He had given 
up the grandiose notion about Olympic fame and seemed to be in better con¬ 
trol of his speech and motor behavior. But he had not returned to normal. He 
was still given to rambling speeches and continued to flirt with the female staff 
members. His mood was unstable, fluctuating between comical amusement and 
quick irritation. In contrast to most of the other patients, George was gregarious 
and energetic. He organized group activities and saw himself as a hospital aide, 
not as a patient. 

These residual symptoms dissipated gradually over the next 2 weeks. He 
was switched to voluntary status and now recognized the severity of his previ¬ 
ous condition. In retrospect, the events that had struck him as exhilarating and 
amusing seemed like a nightmare. He said that his thoughts had been racing a 
mile a minute. He had been totally preoccupied with the conference meet and 
upcoming events. The locker room incident caused him considerable concern as 
he admitted the possibility that he could have seriously injured someone with 
the sword. 



108 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Following discharge from the hospital, George was kept on a maintenance 
dosage of lithium. He attended an outpatient clinic regularly for individual psy¬ 
chotherapy, and his blood levels of lithium were carefully monitored. George 
and Cheryl also began conjoint therapy sessions with a dual purpose in mind. 
They needed to work on improving their own relationship, and they also wanted 
to acquire more effective means of interacting with and controlling their chil¬ 
dren. This aspect of the treatment program was unsuccessful. Cheryl had been 
seriously embarrassed by George’s behavior during the manic episode. The cru¬ 
dest blow came with the newspaper article in which George had announced his 
affection for another woman. That incident seemed to leave an insurmountable 
wall of tension between George and Cheryl, even though they both made a seri¬ 
ous effort to improve their relationship. The therapist noticed an improvement in 
their interactions during therapy sessions, but they continued to have periodic, 
heated fights at home. Cheryl finally decided that the situation was hopeless, and 
6 months after George was discharged from the hospital, she filed for a divorce. 

George was, of course, shaken by this development, but he managed to 
avoid becoming seriously depressed. His friends from work were an important 
source of social support, particularly during the first weeks after Cheryl and the 
children moved to another apartment. He also met more frequently with his ther¬ 
apist during this period and continued to take lithium carbonate. 


Discussion 


Mood disorders are characterized by a serious, prolonged disturbance of the per¬ 
son’s emotional state. These disturbances may take the form of depression or 
elation. They are accompanied by a host of other problems, including changes in 
sleep patterns, appetite, and activity level. 

Several classification systems have been used to subdivide this broad cat¬ 
egory into more homogeneous groups. The classification system that currently 
seems most useful and that is represented in DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) draws a 
distinction between bipolar and unipolar mood disorders. In bipolar disorders, 
the patient experiences periods of extreme elation (and/or irritability) known as 
manic episodes. These periods usually alternate with periods of normal mood 
and periods of severe depression to form a kind of unpredictable emotional 
cycle that some patients liken to a roller-coaster ride. Unipolar patients, on the 
other hand, experience serious depression without ever swinging to the oppo¬ 
site extreme. George had exhibited manic as well as depressive symptoms, so his 
problem would be diagnosed as a bipolar disorder. 

DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, p. 362) lists the following criteria for a manic 
episode: 

1. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or 
irritable mood lasting at least one week (or any duration if hospitalization 
is necessary). 




Chapter 7 Bipolar Disorder 109 


2. During the period of mood disturbance, three (or more) of the following 
symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable) and have been 
present to a significant degree: 

a. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity 

b. Decreased need for sleep, for example, feeling rested after only 3 
hours of sleep 

c. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking 

d. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing 

e. Distractibility, for example, attention too easily drawn to unimportant 
or irrelevant external stimuli 

f. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or 
sexually) or psychomotor agitation 

g. Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high poten¬ 
tial for painful consequences; for example, the person engages in 
unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business 
investments 

3. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in 
occupational functioning or in usual social activities or relationships with 
others, or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others. 

Bipolar disorders should be distinguished from schizophrenia as well as 
from unipolar mood disorders. Kraepelin (1919, 1971) recognized that manic 
and schizophrenic (dementia praecox) patients often exhibit similar symptoms. 
These include disorganized speech, flight of ideas, and delusional thinking. He 
argued that the difference between the two disorders became apparent on exami¬ 
nation of their long-term course. Most patients who fit Kraepelin’s definition of 
schizophrenia showed a progressive deterioration without periods of recovery. 
Manic-depressive patients, on the other hand, frequently followed a remitting 
course. Although they might have repeated episodes of psychotic behavior, their 
adjustment between episodes was relatively unimpaired. This distinction has 
continued to be one of the most important considerations in the classification of 
serious mental disorders (Miklowitz & Johnson, 2006). 

A less severe form of bipolar disorder is experienced by people who go 
through episodes of expansive mood and increased energy that are not suffi¬ 
ciently severe to be considered manic episodes. These are called hypomanic epi¬ 
sodes. According to DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000), a person who has experienced 
at least one major depressive episode, at least one hypomanic episode, and no 
full-blown manic episodes, would be assigned a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. 
A hypomanic episode is defined in terms of the same symptoms as those that 
describe a manic episode. The distinction between manic and hypomanic epi¬ 
sodes is based on duration and severity. The minimum duration of symptoms for 
a hypomanic episode is 4 days, as opposed to 1 week for a manic episode. In a 
hypomanic episode, the mood change must be noticeable to others, but it must 
not lead to impairment in social or occupational functioning or require hospitali¬ 
zation. If the mood change becomes that severe, it is considered a manic episode. 



110 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Another type of mood disorder is known as cyclothymia, which is a 
chronic but less severe form of bipolar disorder. People who meet the criteria 
for cyclothymia experience several hypomanic episodes and several periods of 
minor depression during a period of 2 years. They do not, however, experience 
periods of disturbance that are sufficiently severe to meet the criteria for major 
depressive episode or manic episode during the first 2 years of their disturbance. 
After the initial 2 years of cyclothymia, full-blown episodes of mania or major 
depression will require that an additional diagnosis, such as bipolar I disorder 
or bipolar II disorder, be superimposed on the cyclothymic disorder. 

Estimates of the prevalence of mood disorders in the general population 
indicate some fairly consistent patterns (Waraich, Goldner, Somers, & Hsu, 
2004). In the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R) study, lifetime 
prevalence was 1.0% for bipolar I disorder and 1.1% for bipolar II disorder. In 
addition to those people who meet definite criteria for a bipolar disorder, many 
people are affected by recurrent episodes of hypomania but do not fully qualify 
for a formal diagnosis according to DSM-IV-TR. The lifetime prevalence of sub¬ 
threshold bipolar disorder was 2.4% in the NCS-R. The lifetime prevalence for 
major depression was much higher—16.2% overall—than the combined rate 
for various forms of bipolar disorder (Kessler, Merikangas, & Wang, 2007). 
Gender differences are not found in the risk for bipolar disorders, but there 
are important gender differences in the rates of major depression for men and 
women. Women are roughly twice as likely as men to experience major depres¬ 
sion at some point during their lives. 

There are also important differences between unipolar and bipolar disor¬ 
ders in terms of both the age of onset and the course of the disorder (Johnson 
& Kizer, 2002). Bipolar patients tend to be younger than unipolar patients at 
the time of their first episode of disturbance, usually between the ages of 20 
and 30. Bipolar patients also tend to experience a greater number of psychotic 
episodes during subsequent years. Both unipolar and bipolar mood disorders 
are associated with substantial impairment in social and occupational function¬ 
ing. In fact, subthreshold bipolar disorders were associated with as much, if 
not more, role impairment than was found for major depression in the NCS-R 
(Kessler et al., 2007). 

George’s case was typical of the classic picture of manic-depressive ill¬ 
ness. He showed an early onset of symptoms and a relatively complete remission 
between episodes. His behavior was so disruptive during each manic episode that 
it had long-term, negative consequences for his social and occupational adjust¬ 
ment. He had serious problems with his job, and his marriage ended in divorce. 

Etiological Considerations 

The fact that George’s maternal uncle had also experienced manic episodes is 
consistent with the literature concerning genetic factors in mood disorders. 
Several family studies have found that the biological relatives of patients with 



Chapter 7 Bipolar Disorder 111 


mood disorders are more likely to develop mood disorders than are people in the 
general population. These data are usually reported in terms of “morbid risk,” or 
the probability that given individuals will develop the disorder during their life¬ 
time. Several studies have now reported that the relatives of unipolar depressives 
are at increased risk for unipolar depression but that they are unlikely to exhibit 
bipolar disorder (McGuffin et al., 2003). The relatives of bipolar patients, on the 
other hand, typically demonstrate an increased risk for both unipolar and bipolar 
disorders. These data have generally been taken to indicate that the bipolar and 
unipolar subgroups are genetically distinct. George’s positive family history for 
bipolar disorder thus may be taken as further validation of his bipolar diagnosis 
and was, in fact, helpful in the decision to try lithium carbonate prior to his first 
full manic episode. 

The role of genetic factors in the etiology of mood disorders would be 
clearer if a specific model of genetic action could be identified. Molecular 
genetic studies have identified linkage to several potential chromosome regions 
that may contain genes that contribute to the development of bipolar disorder 
(Farmer, Elkin, & McGuffin, 2007). Unfortunately, other laboratories have 
failed to replicate many of the preliminary findings that have been reported over 
the past few years. What should we make of these inconsistencies? The likely 
explanation is that mood disorders are genetically heterogeneous (i.e., they are 
produced by different genes in different people with similar disorders). Further 
evidence is needed from additional linkage studies, and the next few years will 
undoubtedly witness exciting reports in this area of research (Lau & Eley, 2010). 

Although genetic factors play some role in the development of bipolar dis¬ 
order, they cannot account for it completely. Various experiences throughout the 
person’s life must also influence the onset or expression of psychotic symptoms 
as well as the course of the disorder (Miklowitz & Johnson, 2009). The gener¬ 
ally accepted diathesis-stress model would suggest that bipolar patients inherited 
some unidentified form of predisposition to the disorder and that the expres¬ 
sion of this predisposition then depends on subsequent environmental events. 
Stressful life events frequently play an important role in the course of the disor¬ 
der, particularly in triggering relapse (Cohen, Hammen, Henry, & Daley, 2004). 

In George’s case, it would be reasonable to wonder whether the highly 
competitive atmosphere associated with college coaching might have triggered 
the onset of his manic symptoms or his depressive episodes. The weeks pre¬ 
ceding his manic episode were busier than usual. His teams had been winning, 
and the athletic department’s administration seemed to be putting considerable 
emphasis on the final meets of the season. Viewed from George’s perspective, 
this amounted to enormous pressure. The job situation was also compounded 
by his family responsibilities. As he began to spend more and more time with 
his team, his wife became increasingly discontent and irritable. Her demands, 
coupled with his coaching responsibilities, placed George in a difficult position; 
he could reduce the amount of time spent planning and supervising workouts, 
thus increasing the probability that the team would lose, or he could reduce the 



112 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


amount of time spent with his wife and children, thus increasing the probability 
that she would ask for a divorce. 

George’s relationship with his family illustrates the complex interactive 
nature of mood disorders. Although his marital problems may not have been 
caused by his mood-disorder symptoms, they certainly made an already dif¬ 
ficult situation virtually impossible. The marital adjustment of bipolar patients 
has received considerable attention in the research literature, which indicates 
that bipolar patients are much more likely than unipolar patients or people in 
the general population to be divorced (van der Voort, Gossens, & van der Bijl, 
2007). The emotional atmosphere within a family is also related to the patient’s 
social functioning and the course of the disorder. Patients who live in a stressful 
family environment are much more likely to relapse than patients from families 
that are characterized by lower levels of interpersonal stress (Miklowitz, 2007). 

George’s situation was probably typical of the problems experienced by 
manic patients. Cheryl was forced by his erratic behavior to act as a buffer 
between George and the community. When he acted strangely at work, his col¬ 
leagues called her to see if she could explain his behavior. She often found 
herself making up excuses for him to avoid the unpleasant necessity of disclos¬ 
ing the personal details of his problems. Her efforts were then “rewarded” by 
his continued excesses. Cheryl gradually came to see herself as a victim. The 
incident with the undergraduate student was the last straw. George’s behavior 
was even more difficult for Cheryl to understand and accept because of his 
inconsistency. She argued that if he were always irrational or out of control, 
she could easily attribute these problems to a psychiatric disorder. However, 
between episodes, and most of the time, George was a very reasonable, con¬ 
siderate person. Cheryl found it difficult to believe that he could change so 
drastically over such a short period of time. Her first inclination was always to 
attribute his wild, manic behavior to some malicious intent on his part. When 
he became depressed, she often blamed herself. Eventually, the problem was 
simply more than she could handle. 

Treatment 

Lithium is the treatment of choice for bipolar disorders. The therapeutic effects 
of lithium salts were first reported in 1949 by John Cade, an Australian psychia¬ 
trist. Cade had been studying the toxic effects of uric acid in guinea pigs and the 
possibility that the lithium ion might reduce this toxicity. He was not initially 
interested in behavioral effects, but he happened to notice that guinea pigs that 
had been injected with lithium carbonate became lethargic and unresponsive to 
stimuli despite remaining fully conscious. This unexpected finding led Cade 
to wonder whether lithium carbonate might have beneficial effects for psychotic 
patients who were extremely excited. He used the drug with a sequence of 10 
manic patients and obtained remarkable results. Even chronic patients who had 



Chapter 7 Bipolar Disorder 113 


been considered untreatable responded favorably within a period of several days. 
Furthermore, several patients with schizophrenia who had previously been mark¬ 
edly restless and excited became quiet and amenable. When lithium was discon¬ 
tinued, the patients generally returned to their previous patterns of wild behavior. 

Other clinicians soon began to experiment with the use of lithium and met 
with similar results. Their favorable impression of lithium’s effects were later 
confirmed by a number of controlled double-blind studies (Young & Newham, 
2006). In fact, lithium can be beneficial for patients who are depressed as well 
as for those who are manic. This is particularly true for bipolar patients. Several 
studies that used double-blind procedures and placebo control groups have con¬ 
cluded that lithium is effective in preventing the recurrence of manic episodes 
and probably effective in preventing recurrent depression in bipolar patients 
(Smith, Cornelius, Warnock, Bell, & Young, 2007). 

Other forms of medication can also be useful in treating bipolar disorders. 
For example, certain anticonvulsant drugs such as carbamazepine (Tegretol) 
and valproic acid (Depakote) often lead to improvement in patients who have 
not responded to lithium. This is an important consideration because about 40% 
of bipolar patients do not show an adequate clinical response to lithium alone. 
These are often patients whose moods cycle rapidly (defined in DSM-IV-TR as 
bipolar patients with four or more separate episodes of depression, mania, or 
hypomania within 12 months). The anticonvulsants may be used either on their 
own or in combination with lithium (Nasrallah, Ketter, & Kalali, 2006). 

George responded favorably to lithium during his brief stay in the hospital, 
and he returned to his job soon after discharge. It is possible that the episode 
might have been partially caused by his failure to take the medication regularly. 
This is a serious problem with all forms of psychopharmacological treatment. It 
is particularly severe with psychotic patients who characteristically lack insight 
into the severity of their problem. Every effort is usually made to educate the 
patient in this regard. The cooperation of family members is often enlisted to 
assist in the regulation of daily doses. The dangers of lithium also require that 
patients being treated on an outpatient basis be seen regularly to monitor levels 
of lithium in the blood. Despite these precautions, many patients fail to follow 
medication schedules designed to prevent relapse. 

Psychotherapy is also an important part of treatment for many patients with 
bipolar disorder (Benyon, Soares-Weiser, Wollacott, Duffy, & Geddes, 2008; 
Geller & Goldberg, 2007). Used in combination with lithium or other types of 
medication, psychotherapy can help patients cope with social circumstances 
that may trigger further episodes. These include family conflict and stressful life 
events. Treatment may be aimed at improving the person’s communication skills 
and problem-solving abilities to strengthen interpersonal relationships (Frank, 
2005). Psychological interventions can also be used to increase medication com¬ 
pliance by identifying and addressing patients’ reservations about taking lithium 
and other drugs. 



114 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Discussion Questions 


1. Patients with bipolar disorder are often reluctant to take their medication 
because they don't want to give up periods of hypomania, when they feel 
exceptionally upbeat and productive. What would you say to a close friend 
with bipolar disorder who did not want to take medication? 

2. Bipolar disorder can have a devastating impact on family relationships. Is 
there anything about the behavior of bipolar patients (especially during a 
manic episode) that might make it particularly difficult for a spouse to under¬ 
stand and accept the person’s behavior as being part of a psychological disor¬ 
der (rather than simply bad judgment)? 

3. What evidence supports the decision to separate unipolar and bipolar mood 
disorders in the official classification system? In what ways are they differ¬ 
ent? In what ways are they similar? Can you think of other ways in which the 
mood disorders might be subdivided into more homogeneous subtypes? 

4. Do you think that people who suffer from bipolar disorder are more likely 
than other people to seek out and participate in activities and occupations that 
are particularly stressful? 




CHAPTER 8 


Somatization Disorder 


Meredith Coleman opened her eyes, groggy from the anesthesia, and blinked 
several times. She began to moan softly. The nurse turned toward her and asked 
how she was feeling. She felt queasy and cold, so the nurse gently pulled the 
blanket up to her chin. She was 25 years old and had just had a hysterectomy 
because she had suffered from heavy menstrual bleeding and constant uter¬ 
ine pain for the past year. Her physician was very reluctant to do the operation 
because Meredith was young and had never had any children, but her frequent 
visits to his office and complaints of pain and heavy flow had finally convinced 
him to go ahead. He was optimistic that the procedure would improve her condi¬ 
tion, and she was eager for relief from the bleeding and repeatedly expressed her 
desire to have the surgery. 

Meredith spent a restless night in the uncomfortable hospital bed, her pain 
from the surgery only partly eased by pain medication. The next morning her gyne¬ 
cologist came in to check on her. Meredith was worried about the pain she still felt 
in her abdomen, but her doctor assured her it was normal and that she should expect 
the pain to continue until she had healed fully which would take weeks. At her 
checkup 6 months after the surgery, she had experienced no improvement at all in 
the uterine pain, despite the fact that her uterus had been removed. If anything, the 
pain was a little worse. The doctor assured her that it could not be uterine pain and 
that nothing was wrong with her. Meredith was unsatisfied after this checkup 
and scheduled an appointment with her regular doctor, Dr. Griffin. 

Meredith, in fact, had a number of physicians treating her for many differ¬ 
ent physical problems. She had been in poor health since she was a teenager. She 
had severe, stabbing pain that radiated down both of her legs nearly every day. 
The pain seemed to originate in her lower back and was somewhat unpredict¬ 
able. It would seem to “burst” in her toes. Sometimes it would occur only once a 
day and last just a few minutes, and other times it would last for hours and bring 
her to tears. The pain was ruining her life. 

She vaguely remembered sharp pains in her calf muscles when she was in 
high school, but her legs really started bothering her when she was a sophomore 


115 



116 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


in college. In the beginning, the pain only occurred occasionally, but now it was 
a constant problem. Over the past 3 years, her legs had also become progres¬ 
sively weaker. The muscles in her legs would at times be so weak she could 
barely stand. She could not walk any distance at all due to this weakness. She 
had begun using her grandmother’s old wheelchair that had been stored in the 
family’s attic since her grandmother died. It was especially helpful when she 
was going to the mall where she would have to walk long distances. On certain 
days, her legs would completely give out, and she would fall to the ground. She 
had been to many specialists to try to find the cause of the problem with her legs, 
but no one had been able to figure it out. She had been evaluated by neurolo¬ 
gists and had MRIs, but there was no evidence of any condition that could be 
responsible for her symptoms. She was frequently tearful and despairing about 
her health, and her emotional outbursts worried her parents. 

She had a number of other physical problems. Since puberty, she had suf¬ 
fered from frequent headaches that were characterized by sharp pain. They did 
not fit the typical symptom pattern of migraine headaches. She also had chest 
pains and often thought she was going to have a heart attack. The chest pains 
were her most recent symptom, only occurring over the past 6 months. One day, 
she went to the emergency room because of the chest pain and had a full workup 
to rule out a heart attack. The emergency physician told her anxiety was causing 
her chest pains and that her heart was normal and healthy. She was surprised and 
insulted by these comments because it was clear to her that she wasn’t going 
crazy and that her chest pains were not in her head. 

After meals, she frequently experienced abdominal distention and uncom¬ 
fortable bloating. She ate infrequently because of the bloating and because 
she often had nausea that made food very unappetizing. When she did eat, she 
would often have to lie down because of the bloating and stomachaches so 
severe she doubled over in pain. She had been tested extensively to rule out an 
ulcer or food allergy, but no cause had been discovered. Her gallbladder had 
been removed two years ago, but that did not relieve her symptoms. 

Meredith met her husband, Steve, in college. He was a year older, and they 
married when he graduated from college and started his job as an insurance 
agent. At the time, Meredith was 21 years old. After the wedding, she never fin¬ 
ished her degree, and her grades were suffering when she left college because 
her headaches made it difficult to study. Steve left her 2 years later, and she 
worked as a secretary to support herself. She lost her job after about a year when 
her health problems had caused her to miss too much work. So at 24 years old, 
she moved back in with her parents. 

She did not go out very often anymore because she had trouble walking any 
distance and was afraid her legs would give out. She accompanied her parents 
to church but always wanted to hold onto her father’s arm to steady herself. Her 
mother did all her laundry and prepared the meals. Her parents were both very 
concerned about their daughter’s well-being. They were frustrated that no doctor 
could solve her problems. 



Chapter 8 Somatization Disorder 117 


When she went in for the appointment with Dr. Griffin that she made after 
her gynecologist told her nothing was wrong with her, she discussed her con¬ 
tinuing uterine pain, her headaches, and her leg pains. The doctor listened sym¬ 
pathetically, but eventually interrupted Meredith and told her that she didn’t 
understand what was going on. She said she could try another medication to 
help manage Meredith’s digestive problems, to see if that would work. When Dr. 
Griffin handed her the prescription and opened the door of the examining room 
to leave, Meredith became very upset with her for giving her 12 months’ worth 
of refills. To her, that made it clear that Dr. Griffin did not want to see her back 
for another 12 months. When she began to cry about that. Dr. Griffin suggested 
that she see a psychologist for an evaluation. Meredith became indignant and 
angry at the suggestion of a psychologist, accusing Dr. Griffin of suggesting that 
she was insane. The doctor explained to Meredith that sometimes emotions com¬ 
plicate medical problems and suggested that a psychological evaluation would 
help her determine the best course of medical treatment. Meredith finally agreed 
to be seen by a psychologist. 

Social History 


Meredith grew up in a small town where her father was a bank president, and 
her mother was a homemaker. She was the youngest of three children. Her 
brother Wallace was 5 years older. Wallace was a natural athlete, popular, and 
a good student. He played baseball throughout his childhood and in college. He 
had attended law school and was now married and busy working to establish his 
law practice. Her sister Claire was 2 years older and had been a cheerful, calm- 
natured girl who loved to ride horses. During high school, she had spent all her 
free time at the stables. Claire was now married to her high school sweetheart 
and busy with 5-year-old twins. 

During Meredith’s childhood, her father’s mother lived with the family. She 
had survived a stroke that had left her very debilitated, and she had trouble walking. 
Meredith’s mother, Evelyn, spent a lot of time caring for her. Evelyn would prepare 
special meals for her and would feed her because the stroke affected the use of her 
hands, which she could not hold steady. Evelyn was quite devoted to her mother- 
in-law and made sure she had everything she needed. Unfortunately, Meredith’s 
grandmother died when Meredith was 12 years old. Meredith later told all her 
friends in college about her grandmother and how traumatic it had been when she 
died. She described her feelings of grief and the funeral in a dramatic fashion. 

Evelyn was outgoing like Wallace, and she had a lot of friends. She had 
a busy social life and was active in church groups and in civic organizations. 
As early as she could remember, Meredith never felt like she fit in. She was 
large-framed and tall for her age, not pretty or petite like her mother or sister. 
Meredith was somewhat outspoken and bossy with the other children and did 
not have many friends. Her mother always seemed a little embarrassed by her. 




118 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


However, her mother clearly was very proud of Wallace. She went to every one 
of his Little League games and was always bragging about his accomplishments 
to her friends. Meredith always felt “insignificant” and ignored, and it seemed to 
her that her mother had time for everyone else but her. When Meredith would 
try to talk to her mother about feeling left out at school with the other girls, her 
mother would tell her to pray about it and not to feel sorry for herself. 

When Meredith began having headaches shortly after her grandmother died, 
her mother was very sympathetic. She would tell her to lie down and would 
bring her a cool compress for her head. That seemed to ease the pain some. When 
Meredith complained of bloating and nausea, her mother recommended that she 
eat blander foods that might be easier on her stomach. She began to prepare spe¬ 
cial foods for Meredith when the family meal might be too spicy or hard to digest. 

In high school, Meredith became active in chorus. She was very talented and 
had a beautiful voice. Through her singing, she began to find a measure of accept¬ 
ance with other students. The chorus members hung out together, and Meredith 
was included in their activities. She continued to sing in college and decided to 
become a music major. She hoped for a career as an opera singer, and her profes¬ 
sors encouraged her to develop her voice, which showed a great deal of promise. 
She met Steve when he asked her out after he saw her perform in a college pro¬ 
duction. He was enthralled by her voice and her stage presence. They quickly fell 
in love and were engaged 3 months later. 

After they married, he was protective and tender toward her when she would 
take to bed with a headache or other ailment. She adored him and tried to be 
the perfect wife. She spent a lot of time decorating their first apartment, and 
she fixed him gourmet meals. He threw himself into work, trying to establish 
his clientele. Meredith found it somewhat difficult to adjust to his long hours 
at work and his preoccupation with success. Increasingly during the day when 
he was gone, she would have problems with her legs. Eventually she brought 
her grandmother’s wheelchair from home to their apartment to help her cope 
with getting around and to keep from falling when she felt weak. This bothered 
Steve. He began to criticize her and started to complain about the cost of medi¬ 
cal bills from her frequent doctor’s appointments. They continued this way for 
the rest of their marriage, with increasingly frequent arguments. One day, Steve 
announced that he wanted a divorce and that he had fallen in love with some¬ 
one else. Meredith was completely devastated, but she could not convince him to 
stay. When he moved out and filed for divorce, she stayed in their apartment, got 
a job, and tried to cope until eventually she moved back with her parents. 

Treatment 


Meredith reluctantly made an appointment with the clinical psychologist recom¬ 
mended by Dr. Griffin. The psychologist. Dr. Edwards, conducted an extensive 
interview and tried to construct a medical history. It was difficult to get clear 




Chapter 8 Somatization Disorder 119 


dates from Meredith about when her various symptoms had begun. With her writ¬ 
ten consent. Dr. Edwards obtained Meredith’s medical records from Dr. Griffin 
and all the other physicians who had treated her. He needed to use these records 
to construct the chronology. They would also allow him to evaluate whether there 
was any medical basis to explain her numerous physical complaints. He was 
struck by Meredith’s distress over her divorce and her despair and sadness over 
her physical problems. He scheduled a follow-up appointment with her so he 
could propose a plan of treatment after he had reviewed all the medical records. 

When reviewing the reams of medical records from all her treatments and 
evaluations, Dr. Edwards discovered that physician after physician had been 
unable to establish any physical basis for her numerous symptoms. Meredith’s 
symptoms met criteria for somatization disorder. A person with this disorder has 
numerous physical symptoms that are not due to medical problems but have a 
psychological origin. 

At their next session, he proposed a course of treatment to address her 
depressed mood and her somatic symptoms. Unfortunately, Meredith refused 
to agree to treatment. She became tearful again and told him that the only 
reason she agreed to see him was to help Dr. Griffin in planning her medical 
treatment. She didn’t believe she needed a psychologist because she wasn’t 
crazy. None of Dr. Edwards’ rationales for entering psychological treatment 
could convince her. He eventually agreed to call Dr. Griffin with his findings 
to help with her medical treatment. 

He described the findings of his evaluation to Dr. Griffin and suggested 
that she attempt to manage Meredith’s problems by providing counseling in her 
medical practice. They discussed a general treatment plan in which Dr. Griffin 
would schedule regular appointments with Meredith. Meredith would also meet 
biweekly with Dr. Griffin’s nurse. The nurse would record her symptoms, check 
her vital signs, and provide support and encouragement (especially for spending 
fewer days in bed and decreasing her wheelchair use). Dr. Griffin would meet 
every other month with Meredith and would review the nurse’s notes on their 
sessions. Meredith seemed relieved by this plan and readily agreed. Dr. Griffin 
also prescribed an antidepressant, which she convinced Meredith to take by 
discussing the role of emotional upset in exacerbating pain. Dr. Edwards also 
encouraged Dr. Griffin to stop sending Meredith to specialists, and Meredith 
agreed not to contact any other physicians. After a few months, they were to 
decrease the frequency of these regularly scheduled sessions. 

Meredith responded well to this treatment strategy. She continued to have 
problems with her symptoms, but with the predictable contact with her physician 
and the increased support and reassurance, she was somewhat less distressed 
by them. She kept her word about not going to other physicians. Her depressed 
mood improved, and she did not have any more emergency room visits. The fre¬ 
quency of her contact with physicians decreased, and the weakness in her legs 
subsided. She eventually began another job, and she made plans to find a new 
apartment of her own. 



120 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Discussion 


Somatization disorder is one of the somatoform disorders, a category that also 
includes conversion disorder, hypochondriasis, pain disorder, and body dysmor¬ 
phic disorder. Somatoform disorders are characterized by physical symptoms 
that appear to be due to a somatic (bodily) disease or disorder that cannot be 
medically explained and that frequently lead to visits to physicians for diagnosis 
and treatment. Many researchers believe that the physical symptoms originate 
in psychological distress and that somatization is a psychological mechanism in 
which physical symptoms express this distress (Hurwitz, 2004). People with a 
somatoform disorder do not intentionally or consciously produce the symptoms, 
as in malingering, which is pretending to have symptoms to avoid military serv¬ 
ice or legal responsibility for a crime, or for financial gain in a lawsuit or for dis¬ 
ability benefits. People with a somatoform disorder also differ from those with 
factitious disorder, which is pretending to have symptoms to assume the sick 
role. Instead, they actually experience the symptoms, such as feeling pain, expe¬ 
riencing weakness or seizures, or feeling bloated or nauseous, and fully believe 
they have a bodily medical condition. They typically seek treatment from physi¬ 
cians rather than psychologists or psychiatrists (Hurwitz, 2004). 

Somatization disorder is defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR , APA, 2000, pp. 486-490) by the following 
criteria: 

1. The person has a history of many physical complaints beginning before age 
30 that occur over a period of several years and result in treatment being 
sought or significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important 
areas of functioning. 

2. Each of the following criteria must have been met, with individual symp¬ 
toms occurring at any time during the course of the disturbance: 

a. Four pain symptoms: a history of pain related to at least four different 
sites or functions (e.g., head, abdomen, back, joints, extremities, chest, 
rectum, during menstruation, during sexual intercourse, 1 or during 
urination) 

b. Two gastrointestinal symptoms: a history of at least two gastrointestinal 
symptoms other than pain (e.g., nausea, bloating, vomiting other than 
during pregnancy, diarrhea, or intolerance of several different foods) 

c. One sexual symptom: a history of at least one sexual or reproductive 
symptom other than pain (e.g., sexual indifference, erectile or ejacu¬ 
latory dysfunction, irregular menses, excessive menstrual bleeding, 
vomiting throughout pregnancy) 


1 Some experts on sexual disorders propose that vaginismus and dyspareunia be classified as pain disorders rather 
than as sexual disorders (e.g., Binik, 2005; Binik et al., 2002). 




Chapter 8 Somatization Disorder 121 


d. One pseudoneurological symptom: a history of at least one symptom 
or deficit suggesting a neurological condition not limited to pain (con¬ 
version symptoms such as impaired coordination or balance, paralysis 
or localized weakness, difficulty swallowing or lump in throat, apho¬ 
nia [inability to speak], urinary retention, blindness, deafness, seizures; 
dissociative symptoms such as amnesia; or loss of consciousness other 
than fainting) 

3. Each of the symptoms in Criteria 2 cannot be fully explained by a known 
general medical condition or the direct effects of a substance, or when 
there is a related general medical condition, the physical complaints are in 
excess of what would be expected from the history, physical examination, 
or laboratory findings. 

People with somatization disorder often have histrionic, excessively emo¬ 
tional, dramatic, vague, or attention-seeking ways of describing their physical 
symptoms. They are hopeful about receiving a diagnosis that will give meaning 
to their symptoms. The symptoms they experience fit the patient’s beliefs about 
disease rather than actual disease process and characteristics of physiology, so 
they appear unusual or bizarre to the physician (Hurwitz, 2004). For example, 
a person with a somatoform disorder might experience loss of touch in a hand 
that affects the area covered by a glove rather than the areas of the hand and arm 
actually controlled by individual nerves. 

When the concept of somatizing was originally developed, symptoms were 
thought to symbolize the patient’s emotional problem (Merskey, 2004), such as 
a patient’s aphonia (inability to speak) symbolically enacting their feeling of 
stifling their emotions to avoid interpersonal conflict. This speculation, rooted 
in psychoanalytic theories of repression, was not supported by empirical data. 
Current theories of pain downplay dualism, or mind-body separation, and argue 
that the mind and body are the same. Research indicates that the experience of 
pain is always the result of input both from the site of the pain and from the cen¬ 
tral nervous system, which is affected by emotions and interpersonal conflicts. 
It is therefore difficult to untangle the physical and psychological contributions 
to the experience of pain (Kirmayer, Groleau, Looper, & Dao, 2004). Emotional 
stress may affect a person’s physical health in subtle ways through chronic acti¬ 
vation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis or by interfering with 
normal sleep, which can produce physical symptoms. Immune function is also 
compromised by stress. 

Often people with somatoform disorders are not identified as having a psy¬ 
chological disorder. One study conducted a follow-up of patients with somatic 
symptoms. Years later, they continued to have somatic symptoms and continued 
to have frequent visits to physicians. Their general-practice physician would 
not find any medical cause for their symptoms. After running some of their 
own diagnostic tests, they would refer them to specialists, who also found no 
cause. Eventually, the patient switched to a new general practitioner and began 



122 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


the course of diagnostic tests and referrals anew (Crimlisk et al., 2000). Even 
after many unproductive medical visits, few patients believed that psychological 
factors caused their symptoms. If they had depression or anxiety, they typically 
viewed it as a reaction to their symptoms. Some continued to believe they had a 
diagnosis that physicians had definitively ruled out. Few patients ever received 
a referral for mental-health treatment or evaluation. In another national sample, 
about 20% of people with severe somatoform disorders had received mental- 
health treatment for comorbid anxiety or depression (Leiknes, Finset, Mourn, & 
Sandanger, 2007). 

The underdiagnosing of somatization disorder is very costly to both the 
patient and to society. The patient is at real risk for iatrogenic harm (illnesses or 
damage caused by medical treatment). For example, a patient who undergoes a 
spinal tap could be harmed by the procedure. Being hospitalized to run a battery 
of tests could expose the patient to infectious diseases that patients sometimes 
contract in hospitals, such as staph infections. Social costs include the significant 
burden to the health-care system of repeated, unnecessary diagnostic procedures 
and emergency room visits in addition to loss of productivity at work. 

The extent of unnecessary medical procedures that were conducted on 
patients with somatization disorder was examined in an important study by Fink 
(1992). He identified people between the ages of 17 and 49 years who had been 
hospitalized at least 10 times during an 8-year period. Somatizers were identi¬ 
fied as those for whom no clear diagnosis had been established. The somatizers 
were compared to the rest of the patients in the sample for whom a clear diagno¬ 
sis, such as diabetes mellitus or cancer, had been found. The somatizers actually 
had received more surgeries than the medically ill control group. Of the somatiz¬ 
ers, 9% had more than 20 unnecessary surgeries. The most frequently performed 
types of surgery for the somatizers were gynecological procedures such as uter¬ 
ine curettage and hysterectomy, gastrointestinal surgeries, appendectomies, and 
laparoscopies. Almost none of the hysterectomies resulted in the patient’s symp¬ 
toms being resolved. In terms of providing symptom improvement, the success 
rate for all the surgical procedures performed on the somatizers was about 25%, 
about the same as the placebo effect. This study clearly documents the risks and 
costs of failing to recognize a patient’s somatoform disorder. These costs were 
evident for Meredith. She had gallbladder surgery and a hysterectomy by the age 
of 25. Both were medically unnecessary and occurred because different physi¬ 
cians were only aware of some of her difficulties. If her gynecologist had been 
aware of all her other medical history, he may have decided against surgery. 

Physicians and mental-health professionals must be equally cautious 
about overdiagnosing somatoform disorders. Medically unexplained symptoms 
are common and account for up to 30% of all primary-care visits (Kirmayer 
et al., 2004). Medical knowledge is certainly far from perfect and complete. 
Nevertheless, physicians may be reluctant to admit they do not know the cause 
of a symptom, and they may shift the blame for the symptom to the patient’s 
emotional state by invoking a somatoform diagnosis. 



Chapter 8 Somatization Disorder 123 


Researchers have found that five times as many women as men meet the 
criteria for somatization disorder (Karvonen et al., 2004). From 0.2% to 2% of 
women and fewer than 0.2% of men qualify for a diagnosis of somatization dis¬ 
order at some point in their lives (Mai, 2004). Many experts advocate changing 
the criteria, which are very specific and involve many symptoms in particular 
combinations, to make them more inclusive because many more patients that 
don’t meet these criteria have medically unexplained symptoms and are seeking 
help from physicians (Kroenke, Sharpe, & Sykes, 2007). The age of onset of the 
disorder is most commonly in adolescence (Noyes, Stuart, Watson, & Langbehn, 
2006). Somatization disorder is more common among people with lower income 
and lower social status (Ladwig, Marten-Mittag, Erazo, & Giindel, 2001). It is 
also more common among people with high emotional distress. People with 
the disorder often have a history of marriages that ended in divorce (Tomasson, 
Kent, & Coryell, 1991). 

A number of people with somatization disorders also meet diagnostic crite¬ 
ria for a personality disorder. In one study, 72% had a personality disorder, most 
commonly dependent and histrionic types (Stern, Murphy, & Bass, 1993). This 
was a higher rate of coexisting personality disorders than for any other men¬ 
tal illness. A number of people with somatization disorder also meet the crite¬ 
ria for an anxiety or depressive disorder (Leibbrand, Hiller, & Fichter, 2000). 
People with somatization disorder are significantly more likely to make a suicide 
attempt, even when comorbid depression and anxiety are controlled (Chioqueta 
& Stiles, 2004). This may be due to the greater likelihood that they have poor 
social functioning, marital instability, emotional distress, and impulsive, histri¬ 
onic personality traits. For some people, diagnosing and providing appropriate 
treatment for somatization disorder is a matter of life or death. 

Although patients with somatization disorder experience chronic somatic 
symptoms over many years, the specific symptoms they experience frequently 
shift. At one point in time, the patient will experience one type of problem, but 
a year later that symptom may have disappeared while another has developed 
(Simon & Gureje, 1999). In one 2-year follow-up of individuals with somatiza¬ 
tion, only one-third continued to have the same symptoms (Craig, Boardman, 
Mills, Daly-Jones, & Drake, 1993). 

People with somatization disorder have many impairments in their ability 
to function; in fact, the rates of impairment rival that of people with schizophre¬ 
nia (Bass, Peveler, & House, 2001). Up to 10% in one sample were confined to 
a wheelchair. Overall, people with somatization disorder spend an average of 7 
days a month in bed. Often they are unable to hold a job. Impairments are typi¬ 
cally worse than those associated with medically explained symptoms because the 
somatization was more likely to be chronic and persistent (Harris, Orav, Bates, & 
Barksy, 2008). In addition to health-care costs to society associated with soma¬ 
tization, loss of work productivity is a significant social burden (Bermingham, 
Cohen, Hague, & Parsonage, 2010). Some of these impairments were evident in 
Meredith’s life, although she was not as disabled as others with the disorder. 



124 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Etiological Considerations 

Psychodynamic theorists have suggested that somatization disorder is related to 
the use of the psychological defense mechanism of denial. People with the dis¬ 
order presumably substitute somatic symptoms for the direct expression of psy¬ 
chological distress. Some early reports indicated that people from non-Western 
cultures found it more acceptable to express their feelings in somatic rather than 
psychological terms. Less-sophisticated people who were not particularly psy¬ 
chologically minded, or people from cultures that did not promote a psychologi¬ 
cal focus, were thought to be more likely to somatize (Gureje, Simon, Ustun, 
& Goldberg, 1997). Children brought to a mental-health clinic for treatment 
were more likely to present with somatic complaints if they were in Thailand 
and with depressive symptoms if they were in the United States; however, there 
were no differences in rates of depressive symptoms and somatic complaints 
among Thai and U.S. children in the community (Weiss, Tram, Weisz, Rescorla, 
& Achenbach, 2009). This suggests that cultural factors may affect how people 
describe their problems when seeking help but not necessarily their experienc¬ 
ing of the symptoms. Investigators who conducted a study of more than 25,000 
patients in 14 countries on 5 continents found that there were no differences 
among the different countries in the relationship between psychological and 
physical symptoms (Simon, VonKorff, Piccinelli, Fullerton, & Ormel, 1999). 
Many patients with depression who reported a lot of somatic symptoms were 
also able to acknowledge and describe their psychological phenomena, so they 
did not seem to manifest somatization as denial of psychological distress. Denial 
may play a role for some, but not all, people with somatic complaints. 

Even though somatization disorder occurs in cultures all around the world, 
cultural factors must still be considered in the development of these symp¬ 
toms. Certain cultural groups have specific syndromes consisting of somatic, 
and sometimes emotional, symptoms (Kirmayer & Young, 1998). Among peo¬ 
ple of Korean descent, hwa-byung consists of feelings of heaviness or burning 
in the throat, headaches, muscle aches, dry mouth, insomnia, indigestion, and 
heart palpitations. Koreans view this syndrome as being caused by suppressed 
rage, particularly at interpersonal or social injustice. In Nigeria, brain fag con¬ 
sists of heat or heaviness in the head associated with studying, typically among 
students with high levels of pressure for success. The DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) 
requires careful consideration of any cultural factors that may explain symptom 
presentation. 

The personality style of alexithymia is a concept first described by psy- 
chodynamically oriented clinicians but is now receiving acceptance by a 
broader group of researchers as a predisposing factor for somatization disorder. 
Alexithymia is a difficulty in identifying and describing one’s emotions. This 
difficulty could lead people to focus on and misinterpret the bodily states asso¬ 
ciated with emotional arousal, therefore heightening them and leading to soma¬ 
tization. A review of the research literature concluded that there is a moderate 



Chapter 8 Somatization Disorder 125 


relationship between alexithymia and somatization (De Gucht & Heiser, 2003). 
Meredith had some trouble being aware of and expressing her emotions. Her 
family did not allow her to talk about feelings, and she was not encouraged to 
think about or discuss her emotions. 

Another psychodynamic concept that has been tested empirically is second¬ 
ary gain, the idea that symptoms provide situational benefits that reward their 
expression. 2 Some examples of secondary gain are sympathy from family mem¬ 
bers, relief from chores or work, or attention from physicians. In an in-depth study 
comparing somatizers with physically ill, psychologically distressed, and healthy 
controls, Craig, Drake, Mills, and Boardman (1994) evaluated the role of stressful 
life events in somatic symptoms and their potential for secondary gain if the per¬ 
son developed illness symptoms. Situations with high potential for secondary gain 
involved rejection by another person, personal failures, and situations with obliga¬ 
tions or commitments. For example, if a spouse threatens to terminate the mar¬ 
riage, symptoms of physical illness might elicit guilt, sympathy, caregiving 
behavior, and a renewed commitment to the relationship, which all constitute sec¬ 
ondary gain. Both the somatizers and the psychologically distressed group had 
significantly higher levels of stressful life events directly preceding the onset of 
symptoms than the physically ill or healthy controls. This supports the idea that 
emotional distress and other psychiatric symptoms are related to somatizing. The 
somatizers were also more likely to have experienced a life crisis with the poten¬ 
tial for secondary gain and were much less likely to make attempts to solve the 
conflict directly. Active problem solving would publicize their emotional distress 
to others and eliminate the effectiveness of somatic complaints in obtaining sec¬ 
ondary gain. For Meredith, stress in her marriage when she felt neglected by her 
husband's commitment to his work can be seen as increasing her somatizing in an 
attempt to regain his attention; if she had directly communicated her feelings of 
being neglected by him, her physical symptoms would have been less effective in 
eliciting his care. 

Somatization disorder may be viewed as learned illness behavior based on 
observing a sick parent or other family member (Mai, 2004). The child may 
identify with the ill person, who then models the behavior. The child’s behav¬ 
ior is, in turn, reinforced by parents, teachers, or health-care professionals who 
give the child more attention or sympathy. The child may subsequently attempt 
to meet emotional or social needs through behaviors such as taking medicine, 
going to the doctor, going to bed, and acting as a patient. Children and ado¬ 
lescents with a number of somatic complaints are more likely to have a family 
member with a chronic physical illness (Fritz, Fritsch, & Hagino, 1997). They 
also are more likely to have family members who use illness for stress reduc¬ 
tion. Meredith clearly had this risk factor. Her grandmother was disabled after 


2 In psychodynamic theory, primary gain refers to the main function of a symptom of protecting the ego from anxiety- 
provoking thoughts or feelings by disguising them as symptoms. 



126 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


her stroke, and Meredith grew up observing the special treatment and attention 
she received from Meredith’s mother. Meredith probably longed for this special 
attention. 

Childhood adversity may also play a role in the development of somatiza¬ 
tion disorder. A history of childhood sexual abuse has been implicated in adult 
somatization disorder (Spitzer, Barnow, Gau, Freyberger, & Grabe, 2008). In 
general, people with medically unexplained symptoms are more likely to report 
a history of traumatization, such as child sexual, physical, or psychological 
abuse (Roelofs & Spinhoven, 2007). The relationship between childhood sex¬ 
ual abuse and adult somatization may be due to dissociation (a disintegration of 
consciousness with experiences of amnesia, depersonalization, and derealiza¬ 
tion). People who were sexually abused as children are more likely to somatize, 
but this association is only found among those who also dissociate (Salmon, 
Skaife, & Rhodes, 2003). 

People with somatization are more likely to have a history of childhood 
illness requiring surgery or hospitalization (Craig et al., 1993). However, this 
history of childhood illness was only related to adult somatizing when it was 
combined with parental neglect, or with parental illness that interfered with the 
parent’s availability for caregiving. More often than not, the parental neglect 
came before the childhood illness. This suggests that for some people, the child¬ 
hood illness may have resulted in the attention the child wanted desperately from 
an unresponsive or withdrawn parent. This experience may teach the child that 
the only way to have emotional needs met is through being nursed and cared 
for when sick. A striking example of this is the experience of one of the women 
with a somatoform disorder who participated in the study by Craig and his col¬ 
leagues (1993). When she was 12 years old, she had been institutionalized and 
did not see her mother even for visits. The only contact she ever had again with 
her mother was when she was hospitalized with kidney disease at the age of 15 
and her mother visited her. Although Meredith was not neglected, she always felt 
excluded from the family and unimportant to her mother. She received the most 
loving attention from her mother when she complained of physical symptoms. 
This pattern clearly contributed to the development of her somatization. 

Some studies have examined specific somatic symptoms. Harris (1989) 
interviewed women seeking medical treatment for menorrhagia (abnormally 
excessive menstrual bleeding) to evaluate how life events might relate to this 
symptom. The 98 women with menorrhagia were compared with 224 control 
women. Over half of the women with menorrhagia experienced a severe life 
event in the 12 months preceding the onset of their menstrual disorder, such as 
a divorce or the loss of a relationship with a boyfriend, compared to 30% of the 
other group. The menorrhagic women focused on their pain and devastation in 
describing their responses to the loss. They reported that they became depressed 
after the loss and before the onset of the menorrhagia. A hysterectomy was con¬ 
ducted on 58% of the women with heavy bleeding. Of the women who had hys¬ 
terectomies, 40% had completely normal uteruses with no sign of any organic 



Chapter 8 Somatization Disorder 127 


pathology. An additional 32% had conditions that were not known to cause 
excessive bleeding. It is unclear whether women seeking treatment for menor¬ 
rhagia actually have more menstrual flow or just perceive that they do. Some 
researchers have speculated that autonomic nervous system arousal associ¬ 
ated with emotional distress could induce dilation of the blood vessels, which 
could increase the blood flow. Meredith’s menorrhagia began after her husband 
divorced her. She reacted to this loss with depression and acute distress, and 
there was no evidence of any pathology in her hysterectomy. It is likely that the 
loss of her marriage and her subsequent depression were related to her heavy 
menstrual bleeding. 

Genetic factors may also play a role in somatization disorder. Women whose 
biological parents had criminal or psychotic behavior and who were adopted 
by nonrelatives had higher rates of somatizing (Mai, 2004). Fathers of women 
with somatization disorder are more likely to have antisocial personality dis¬ 
order. However, results from twin studies have been mixed. Preliminary inves¬ 
tigations indicate that people who somatize have abnormalities in tryptophan 
levels in their bloodstream (Rief et al., 2004). Tryptophan is an amino acid that 
is used in the brain to manufacture serotonin. Serotonin is involved with mood 
and with inhibitory processes from the central nervous system to the peripheral 
nervous system. The exact relationship between tryptophan levels and somatiz¬ 
ing is not yet clear, and more research is needed. Another study found abnor¬ 
mally low glucose metabolism in certain regions of the brain among women 
with a severe somatoform diagnosis, suggesting that these areas were underactive 
(Hakala, Vahlberg, Niemi, & Karlsson, 2006). 

Treatment 

Research on psychopharmacological treatments for somatization disorder sug¬ 
gests that antidepressants are useful in reducing pain and other somatic symp¬ 
toms and associated disability (Mai, 2004; Menza et al., 2001). Antidepressants 
appear to be effective, even with patients who do not have a depressed mood. 
Some patients are resistant to taking an antidepressant, though, because of the 
implication that their somatic symptoms are psychiatric. When the patient with 
somatization disorder has coexisting depression or anxiety, those conditions can 
also be treated, either with medication or psychotherapy. 

Like Meredith, patients with somatization disorder are often reluctant to 
follow recommendations by their physicians to seek psychiatric treatment. The 
patient’s attitude toward psychotherapy when entering treatment affects the long¬ 
term effectiveness of that treatment; patients who were more accepting of psy¬ 
chotherapy had better symptom ratings at the 1-year follow-up after treatment 
(Timmer, Bleichhardt, & Rief, 2006). When the psychiatrist and the physician 
work together, patient compliance and satisfaction are more likely. Successful 
medical management involves one (and no more) thorough medical evaluation 
to rule out organic conditions; the use of treatments that are not dangerous, such 



128 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


as vitamins, lotions, and slings, to allow the patient to “save face”; and moving 
the patient away from focusing on obtaining a diagnosis (Fritz et ah, 1997). The 
physician can legitimize the patient’s somatic complaints by describing them in 
medical language while refraining from providing a diagnosis (Fishbain, Lewis, 
Gao, Cole, & Rosomoff, 2009). The physician should schedule regular visits to 
evaluate any new symptoms and physically examine the patient while refrain¬ 
ing from using testing and medical treatments (Looper & Kirmayer, 2002). This 
strategy reduces doctor shopping and health-care expenditures, as well as the 
patient's risk of injury or complications due to testing or treatment. Dr. Griffin 
used this strategy effectively with Meredith. A schedule of regular appointments 
gave Meredith a chance to have new symptoms evaluated without resorting to 
seeing specialists and being subjected to unnecessary and potentially dangerous 
medical procedures. 

Often patients feel that their physician is denying the reality of their symp¬ 
toms (Salmon, Peters, & Stanley, 1999). This occurs when their doctor says she 
does not know what is causing the symptoms or that everything is fine. Patients 
are also unsatisfied when their physician simply agrees with their proposed 
explanation for the symptoms’ cause, which undermines their trust in their phy¬ 
sician’s competence and openness. The most successful patient-physician inter¬ 
actions occur when the physician legitimizes the patient’s suffering and provides 
an explanation that allows the patient to escape blame for the condition (but 
which also allows them a way to manage it). 

Group cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is also effective in treating 
somatization disorder (Lidbeck, 2003; Looper & Kirmayer, 2002). Treatment 
typically focuses on relaxation training, problem solving, coping with stress, 
health education, assertiveness training, and encouraging emotional expression. 
Individual affective CBT has been shown in a controlled study to effectively 
improve symptoms and reduce health-care costs, with improvements lasting at 
least 1 year after treatment completion (Woolfolk, Allen, & Tiu, 2007). First, 
relaxation training to cope with physical discomfort is taught, then patients 
learn to differentiate their thoughts and feelings and regulate their emotions 
effectively. Identifying feelings can be very difficult at first, so it is useful to 
begin by focusing on feelings related to physical symptoms (Woolfolk & Allen, 
2010). Cognitive restructuring and distraction from physical symptoms is also 
employed. Finally, the costs and benefits of playing the sick role are explored, 
and alternative strategies are developed. This treatment in conjunction with 
medical management by the primary-care physician appears to be an effective 
approach to treating somatization disorder. 


Discussion Questions 


1. What experiences from Meredith's childhood were important in leading to 
her somatization disorder? 




Chapter 8 Somatization Disorder 129 


2. Dr. Edwards was not able to convince Meredith to enter psychological treat¬ 
ment. Do you think he did enough to try? Do you think she would have ben¬ 
efited from therapy, or was the medical management enough? 

3. In what way does not identifying somatization disorder when it is there harm 
patients? In what way does identifying it when it is not there harm patients? 

4. How do patients with somatization disorder cause special difficulty for pri¬ 
mary-care physicians? What makes them especially hard to treat? 



CHAPTER 9 


Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 


Bill McClary made his first appointment at the mental-health center reluctantly. 
He was 25 years old, single, and unemployed. His sister, Colleen, with whom he 
had been living for 18 months, had repeatedly encouraged him to seek profes¬ 
sional help. She was concerned about his peculiar behavior and social isolation. 
He spent most of his time daydreaming, often talked to himself, and occasion¬ 
ally said things that made little sense. Bill acknowledged that he ought to keep 
more regular hours and assume more responsibility, but he insisted that he did 
not need psychological treatment. The appointment was finally made in an effort 
to please his sister and mollify her husband, who was worried about Bill’s influ¬ 
ence on their three young children. 

During the first interview, Bill spoke quietly and frequently hesitated. The 
therapist noted that Bill occasionally blinked and shook his head as though he 
was trying to clear his thoughts or return his concentration to the topic at hand. 
When the therapist commented on this unusual twitch, Bill apologized politely 
but denied that it held any significance. He was friendly yet shy and clearly ill 
at ease. The discussion centered on Bill’s daily activities and his rather unsuc¬ 
cessful efforts to fit into the routine of Colleen’s family. Bill assured the thera¬ 
pist that his problems would be solved if he could stop daydreaming. He also 
expressed a desire to become better organized. 

Bill continued to be guarded throughout the early therapy sessions. After 
several weeks, he began to discuss his social contacts and mentioned a concern 
about sexual orientation. Despite his lack of close friends. Bill had had some 
limited and fleeting sexual experiences. These had been both heterosexual and 
homosexual in nature. He was worried about the possible meaning and conse¬ 
quences of his encounters with other males. This topic occupied the next several 
weeks of therapy. 

Bill’s “daydreaming” was also pursued in greater detail. It was a source 
of considerable concern to him, and it interfered significantly with his daily 
activities. This experience was difficult to define. At frequent, though irregu¬ 
lar, intervals throughout the day, Bill found himself distracted by intrusive and 


130 



Chapter 9 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 131 


repetitive thoughts. The thoughts were simple and most often alien to his own 
value system. For example, he might suddenly think to himself, “Damn God.” 
Recognizing the unacceptable nature of the thought, Bill then felt compelled to 
repeat a sequence of self-statements that he had designed to correct the initial 
intrusive thought. He called these thoughts and his corrective incantations “scru¬ 
ples.” These self-statements accounted for the observation that Bill frequently 
mumbled to himself. He also admitted that his unusual blinking and head shak¬ 
ing were associated with the experience of intrusive thoughts. 

Six months after Bill began attending the clinic regularly, the therapist 
received a call from Bill’s brother-in-law, Roger. Roger said that he and Bill 
had recently talked extensively about some of Bill’s unusual ideas, and Roger 
wanted to know how he should respond. The therapist was, in fact, unaware of 
any such ideas. Instead of asking Roger to betray Bill’s confidence any further, 
the therapist decided to ask Bill about these ideas at their next therapy session. It 
was only at this point that the therapist finally became aware of Bill’s extensive 
delusional belief system. 

For reasons that will become obvious, Bill was initially reluctant to talk 
about the ideas to which his brother-in-law had referred. Nevertheless, he pro¬ 
vided the following account of his beliefs and their development. Shortly after 
moving to his sister’s home. Bill realized that something strange was happen¬ 
ing. He noticed that people were taking special interest in him and often felt 
that they were talking about him behind his back. These puzzling circumstances 
persisted for several weeks during which Bill became increasingly anxious and 
suspicious. The pieces of the puzzle finally fell in place late one night as Bill 
sat in front of the television. In a flash of insight. Bill suddenly came to believe 
that a group of conspirators had secretly produced and distributed a documentary 
film about his homosexual experiences. Several of his high school friends and a 
few distant relatives had presumably used hidden cameras and microphones to 
record each of his sexual encounters with other men. Bill believed that the film 
had grossed over $50 million at the box office and that this money had been sent 
to the Irish Republican Army to buy arms and ammunition. He therefore held 
himself responsible for the deaths of dozens of people who had died as the result 
of several recent bombings in Ireland. This notion struck the therapist and Bill’s 
brother-in-law as being quite preposterous, but Bill's conviction was genuine. He 
was visibly moved as he described his guilt concerning the bombings. He was 
also afraid that serious consequences would follow his confession. Bill believed 
that the conspirators had agreed to kill him if he ever found out about the movie. 
This imagined threat had prevented Bill from confiding in anyone prior to this 
time. It was clear that he now feared for his life. 

Bill’s fear was exacerbated by the voices that he had been hearing for 
the past several weeks. He frequently heard male voices discussing his sexual 
behavior and arguing about what action should be taken to punish him. They 
were not voices of people with whom Bill was personally familiar, but they were 
always males and they were always talking about Bill. For example, one night 



132 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


when Bill was sitting alone in his bedroom at Colleen’s home, he thought he 
overheard a conversation in the next room. It was a heated argument in which 
one voice kept repeating "He’s a goddamned faggot, and we’ve got to kill him!” 
Two other voices seemed to be asking questions about what he had done and 
were arguing against the use of such violence. Bill was, of course, terrified by 
this experience and sat motionless in his room as the debate continued. When 
Roger tapped on his door to ask if he was all right, Bill was certain that they 
were coming to take him away. Realizing that it was Roger and that he had not 
been part of the conversation. Bill asked him who was in the next room. Roger 
pointed out that two of the children were sleeping in the next room. When Bill 
went to check, he found the children asleep in their beds. These voices appeared 
at frequent but unpredictable intervals almost every day. It was not clear whether 
or not they had first appeared before the development of Bill’s delusional beliefs. 

The details of the delusional system were elaborate and represented a 
complex web of imaginary events and reality. For example, the title of the secret 
him was supposedly Honor Thy Father, and Bill said his name in the him was 
Gay Talese. Honor Thy Father was, in fact, a popular novel that was written 
by Gay Talese and published several years prior to the development of Bill’s 
delusion. The actual novel was about organized crime, but Bill denied any 
knowledge of this “other book with the same title.” According to Bill’s belief 
system, the hlm’s title alluded to Bill’s disrespect for his own father, and his 
own name in the him was a reference to his reputation as a “gay tease.” He 
also maintained that his own picture had been on the cover of Time magazine 
within the past year with the name Gay Talese printed at the bottom. 

An interesting array of evidence was marshaled in support of this delusion. 
For example. Bill pointed to the fact that he had happened to meet his cousin 
accidentally on a subway in Brooklyn 2 years earlier. Why, Bill asked, would 
his cousin have been on the same train if he were not making a secret him 
about Bill’s private life? In Bill’s mind, the cousin was clearly part of a continu¬ 
ous surveillance that had been carefully arranged by the conspirators. The fact 
that Bill came from a very large family and that such coincidences were bound 
to happen did not impress him as a counterargument. Bill also pointed to an 
incident involving the elevator operator at his mother’s apartment building as 
further evidence for the existence of the him. He remembered stepping onto the 
elevator one morning and having the operator give him a puzzled, prolonged 
glance. The man asked him if they knew each other. Bill replied that they did 
not. Bill’s explanation for this mundane occurrence was that the man recog¬ 
nized Bill because he had obviously seen the him recently; he insisted that no 
other explanation made sense. Once again, coincidence was absolutely impos¬ 
sible. His delusional system had become so pervasive and intricately woven that 
it was no longer open to logical refutation. He was totally preoccupied with the 
plot and simultaneously so frightened that he did not want to discuss it with 
anyone. Thus, he had lived in private fear, brooding about the conspiracy and 



Chapter 9 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 133 


helpless to prevent the conspirators from spreading knowledge of his shameful 
sexual behavior. 


Social History 


Bill was the youngest of four children. He grew up in New York City where 
his father worked as a firefighter. Both of his parents were hrst-generation Irish 
Americans. Many of their relatives were still living in Ireland. Both parents 
came from large families. Bill’s childhood memories were filled with stories 
about the family’s Irish heritage. 

Bill was always much closer to his mother than to his father, whom he 
remembered as being harsh and distant. When his parents fought, which they did 
frequently, Bill often found himself caught in the middle. Neither parent seemed to 
make a serious effort to improve their relationship. Bill later learned that his father 
had carried on an extended affair with another woman. His mother depended on 
her own mother, who lived in the same neighborhood, for advice and support and 
would frequently take Bill with her to stay at her parents’ apartment after par¬ 
ticularly heated arguments. Bill grew to hate his father, but his enmity was tem¬ 
pered by guilt. He had learned that children were supposed to respect their parents 
and that, in particular, a son should emulate and revere his father. Mr. McClary 
became gravely ill when Bill was 12 years old, and Bill remembered wishing 
that his father would die. His wish came true. Years later. Bill looked back on this 
sequence of events with considerable ambivalence and regret. 

Bill could not remember having any close friends as a child. Most of his 
social contacts were with cousins, nephews, and nieces. He did not enjoy their 
company or the games that other children played. He remembered himself as a 
clumsy, effeminate child who preferred to be alone or with his mother instead of 
with other boys. 

He was a good student and finished near the top of his class in high school. His 
mother and the rest of the family seemed certain that he would go on to college, 
but Bill could not decide on a course of study. The prospect of selecting a profes¬ 
sion struck Bill as an ominous task. How could he be sure that he wanted to do the 
same thing for the rest of his life? He decided that he needed more time to ponder 
the matter and took a job as a bank clerk after graduating from high school. 

Bill moved to a small efficiency apartment and seemed to perform ade¬ 
quately at the bank. His superiors noted that he was reliable, though somewhat 
eccentric. He was described as quiet and polite; his reserved manner bordered 
on being socially withdrawn. He did not associate with any of the other employ¬ 
ees and rarely spoke to them beyond the usual exchange of social pleasantries. 
Although he was not in danger of losing his job. Bill’s chances for advancement 
were remote. This realization did not perturb Bill because he did not aspire to 
promotion in the banking profession. It was only a way of forestalling a serious 




134 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


career decision. After 2 years at the bank, Bill resigned. He had decided that the 
job did not afford him enough time to think about his future. 

He was soon able to find a position as an elevator operator. Here, he rea¬ 
soned, was a job that provided time for thought. Over the next several months, 
he gradually became more aloof and disorganized. He was frequently late to 
work and seemed unconcerned about the reprimands that he began receiving. 
Residents at the apartment house described him as peculiar. His appearance was 
always neat and clean, but he seemed preoccupied most of the time. On occasion 
he seemed to mumble to himself, and he often forgot floor numbers to which he 
had been directed. These problems continued to mount until he was fired after 
working for 1 year at this job. 

During the first year after finishing high school, while working at the bank, 
Bill had his first sexual experience. A man in his middle forties who often did 
business at the bank invited Bill to his apartment for a drink, and they became 
intimate. The experience was moderately enjoyable but primarily anxiety pro¬ 
voking. Bill decided not to see this man again. Over the next 2 years, Bill expe¬ 
rienced sexual relationships with a small number of other men as well as with 
a few women. In each case, it was Bill’s partner who took the initiative. Only 
one relationship lasted more than a few days. He became friends with a woman 
named Patty who was about his own age, divorced, and the mother of a 3-year- 
old daughter. Bill enjoyed being with Patty and her daughter and occasionally 
spent evenings at their apartment watching television and drinking wine. Despite 
their occasional sexual encounters, this relationship never developed beyond the 
casual stage at which it began. 

After he was fired from the job as an elevator operator, Bill moved back 
into his mother’s apartment. He later recalled that they made each other anxious. 
Rarely leaving the apartment, Bill sat around the apartment daydreaming in 
front of the television. When his mother returned from work, she would clean, 
cook, and coax him unsuccessfully to enroll in various kinds of job-training 
programs. His social isolation was a constant cause of concern for her. She was 
not aware of his bisexual interests and encouraged him to call women that she 
met at work and through friends. The tension eventually became too great for 
both of them, and Bill decided to move in with Colleen, her husband, and their 
three young children. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


Bill’s adjustment problems were obviously extensive. He had experienced seri¬ 
ous difficulties in the development of social and occupational roles. From a 
diagnostic viewpoint, Bill’s initial symptoms pointed to schizotypal personality 
disorder. In other words, before his delusional beliefs and hallucinations became 
manifest, he exhibited a series of peculiar characteristics in the absence of 




Chapter 9 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 135 


floridly psychotic symptoms. These included several of the classic signs outlined 
by Meehl (1964): anhedonia (the inability to experience pleasure), interpersonal 
aversiveness, and ambivalence. Bill seldom, if ever, had any fun. Even his sexual 
experiences were described in a detached, intellectual manner. He might indi¬ 
cate, for example, that he had performed well or that his partner seemed satis¬ 
fied, but he never said things like, “It was terrific,” or “I was really excited!” He 
strongly preferred to be alone. When Colleen and Roger had parties, Bill became 
anxious and withdrew to his room, explaining that he felt ill. 

Bill’s ambivalence toward other people was evident in his relationship with 
his therapist. He never missed an appointment; in fact, he was always early 
and seemed to look forward to the visits. Despite this apparent dependence, he 
seemed to distrust the therapist and was often guarded in his response to ques¬ 
tions. He seemed to want to confide in the therapist and was simultaneously 
fearful of the imagined consequences. Bill’s pattern of cognitive distraction 
was somewhat difficult to interpret. His “scruples” were, in some ways, similar 
to obsessive thoughts, but they also bore a resemblance to one of Schneider’s 
(1959) first-rank symptoms of schizophrenia—thought insertion. Considering 
this constellation of problems, it was clear that Bill was in need of treatment, but 
it was not immediately obvious that he was psychotic. The therapist decided to 
address Bill’s problems from a cognitive-behavioral perspective. The ambiguity 
surrounding his cognitive impairment seemed to warrant a delay regarding bio¬ 
logical interventions such as medication. 

The beginning therapy sessions were among the most difficult. Bill was 
tense, reserved, and more than a bit suspicious. Therapy had been his sister’s 
idea, not his own. The therapist adopted a passive, nondirective manner and con¬ 
centrated on the difficult goal of establishing a trusting relationship with Bill. In 
the absence of such an atmosphere, it would be impossible to work toward more 
specific behavioral changes. 

Many of the early sessions were spent discussing Bill’s concerns about 
homosexuality. The therapist listened to Bill’s thoughts and concerns and shared 
various bits of information about sexuality and homosexual behavior in particu¬ 
lar. As might be expected. Bill was afraid that homosexual behavior per se was 
a direct manifestation of psychological disturbance. He also wondered about his 
motivation to perform sexual acts with other men and expressed some vague 
hypotheses about this being a reflection of his desire to have a closer relationship 
with his father. The therapist assured Bill that the gender of one’s sexual partner 
was less important than the quality of the sexual relationship. In fact, the ther¬ 
apist was most concerned about Bill’s apparent failure to enjoy sexual activity 
and his inability to establish lasting relationships. Instead of trying to eliminate 
the possibility of future homosexual encounters or to impose an arbitrary deci¬ 
sion based on prevailing sexual norms, the therapist tried to (a) help Bill explore 
his own concerns about the topic, (b) provide him with information that he did 
not have, and (c) help him develop skills that would improve his social and sex¬ 
ual relationships, whether they involved men or women. 



136 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


As their relationship became more secure, the therapist adopted a more 
active, directive role. Specific problems were identified, and an attempt was 
made to deal with each sequentially. The first area of concern was Bill’s daily 
schedule. The therapist enlisted Colleen’s support. Together with Bill, they insti¬ 
tuted a sequence of contingencies designed to integrate his activities with those 
of the family. For example, Colleen called Bill once for breakfast at 7:30 a.m. If 
he missed eating with everyone else, Colleen went on with other activities and 
did not make him a late brunch as she had done prior to this arrangement. In 
general, the therapist taught Colleen to reinforce appropriate behavior and to 
ignore inappropriate behavior as much as possible. Over the initial weeks, Bill 
did begin to keep more regular hours. 

After several weeks of work, this home-based program began to pro¬ 
duce positive changes. Bill was following a schedule closer to that of the rest 
of the family and was more helpful around the house. At this point, the thera¬ 
pist decided to address two problems that were somewhat more difficult: Bill’s 
annoying habit of mumbling to himself and his lack of social contacts with 
peers. Careful interviews with Bill and his sister served as a base for a func¬ 
tional assessment of the self-talk. This behavior seemed to occur most frequently 
when Bill was alone or thought he was alone. He was usually able to control his 
scruples in the presence of others; if he was particularly disturbed by a distract¬ 
ing thought, he most often excused himself and retired to his room. Colleen’s 
response was usually to remind Bill that he was mumbling and occasionally to 
scold him if he was talking loudly. Given the functional value of Bill’s scruples 
in reducing his anxiety about irreverent thoughts, it seemed unlikely that the 
self-talk was being maintained by this social reinforcement. 

The therapist decided to try a stimulus-control procedure. Bill was instructed 
to select one place in the house in which he could daydream and talk to him¬ 
self. Whenever he felt the urge to daydream or repeat his scruples, he was to go 
to this specific spot before engaging in these behaviors. It was hoped that this 
procedure would severely restrict the environmental stimuli that were associ¬ 
ated with these asocial behaviors and thereby reduce their frequency. Bill and 
the therapist selected the laundry room as his daydreaming room because it was 
relatively secluded from the rest of the house. His bedroom was ruled out because 
the therapist did not want it to become a stimulus for behaviors that would inter¬ 
fere with sleeping. Colleen was encouraged to prompt Bill whenever she noticed 
him engaging in self-talk outside of the laundry room. The program seemed to 
have modest, positive results, but it did not eliminate self-talk entirely. 

Interpersonal behaviors were also addressed from a behavioral perspective. 
Since moving to his sister’s home. Bill had not met any people his own age and 
had discontinued seeing his friends in New York City. Several avenues were pur¬ 
sued. He was encouraged to call his old friends and, in particular, to renew his 
friendship with Patty. The therapist spent several sessions with Bill rehearsing 
telephone calls and practicing conversations that might take place. Although Bill 
was generally aware of what things he should say, he was anxious about social 



Chapter 9 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 137 


contacts. This form of behavioral rehearsal was seen as a way of exposing him 
gradually to the anxiety-provoking stimuli. He was also given weekly homework 
assignments involving social contacts at home. The therapist discussed possible 
sources of friends, including a tavern not far from Colleen’s home and occa¬ 
sional parties that Colleen and Roger had for their friends. This aspect of the 
treatment program was modestly effective. Bill called Patty several times and 
arranged to stay with his mother for a weekend so that he could visit with Patty 
and her daughter. Although he was somewhat anxious at first, the visit was suc¬ 
cessful and seemed to lift Bill’s spirits. He was more animated during the fol¬ 
lowing therapy session and seemed almost optimistic about changing his current 
situation. 

It was during one of their visits to the neighborhood tavern that Bill first 
mentioned the imagined movie to Roger. When the therapist learned of these 
ideas, and the auditory hallucinations, he modified the treatment plan. He 
had initially rejected the idea of antipsychotic medication because there was 
no clear-cut evidence of schizophrenia. Now that psychotic symptoms had 
appeared, an appointment was arranged with a psychiatrist who agreed with 
the diagnosis and prescribed risperidone (Risperdal), one of the atypical (or 
“second-generation”) antipsychotic drugs. Because Bill’s behavior was not 
considered dangerous and his sister was able to supervise his activities closely, 
hospitalization was not necessary. All other aspects of the program were 
continued. 

Bill’s response to the medication was positive but not dramatic. The most 
obvious effect was on his self-talk, which was reduced considerably over a 4-week 
period. Bill attributed this change to the virtual disappearance of the annoying, 
intrusive thoughts. His delusions remained intact, however, despite the thera¬ 
pist’s attempt to encourage a rational consideration of the evidence. The following 
example illustrates the impregnable quality of delusional thinking as well as the 
naivete of the therapist. 

One of Bill’s ideas was that his picture had been on the cover of Time maga¬ 
zine. This seemed like a simple idea to test, and Bill expressed a willingness to 
try. Together they narrowed the range of dates to the last 8 months. The thera¬ 
pist then asked Bill to visit the public library before their next session and check 
all issues of Time during this period. Of course. Bill did not find his picture. 
Nevertheless, his conviction was even stronger than before. He had convinced 
himself that the conspirators had seen him on his way to the library, beaten 
him there, and switched magazine covers before he could discover the original. 
Undaunted, the therapist recommended two more public libraries for the next 
week. As might have been expected. Bill did not find his picture at either library 
but remained convinced that the cover had appeared. Every effort to introduce 
contradictory evidence was met by this same stubborn resistance. 

Over the next several weeks. Bill became somewhat less adamant about his 
beliefs. He conceded that there was a chance that he had imagined the whole 
thing. It seemed to him that the plot probably did exist and that the movie was, 



138 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


in all likelihood, still playing around the country, but he was willing to admit 
that the evidence for this belief was less than overwhelming. Although his 
suspicions remained, the fear of observation and the threat of death were less 
immediate, and he was able to concentrate more fully on the other aspects of the 
treatment program. Hospitalization did not become necessary, and he was able to 
continue living with Colleen’s family. Despite important improvements, it was 
clear that Bill would continue to need a special, supportive environment, and it 
seemed unlikely that he would assume normal occupational and social roles, at 
least not in the near future. 


Discussion 


The diagnostic hallmarks of schizophrenia are hallucinations, delusions, and dis¬ 
turbances in affect and thought. DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, p. 312) requires the 
following to support a diagnosis of schizophrenia: 

1. Characteristic symptoms: Two (or more) of the following, each present 
for a significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if success¬ 
fully treated): 

a. Delusions 

b. Hallucinations 

c. Disorganized speech 

d. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior 

e. Negative symptoms, such as affective flattening, alogia, or avolition 
Note: Only one of these symptoms is required if delusions are bizarre, 
hallucinations consist of a voice keeping up a running commentary on 
the person’s behavior or thoughts, or two or more voices are convers¬ 
ing with each other. 

2. Social/occupational dysfunction: For a significant portion of the time 
since the onset of the disturbance, one or more major areas of functioning, 
such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, are markedly below the 
level achieved prior to the onset. 

3. Duration: Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 
months. This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms 
that meet Criterion 1 (active phase symptoms) and may include periods 
of prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual 
periods, the signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative 
symptoms, or two or more symptoms listed in Criterion 1 present in an 
attenuated form (such as odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences). 

Bill clearly fit the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia. Prior to the expres¬ 
sion of his complex, delusional belief system, he exhibited several of the char¬ 
acteristics of a prodromal phase. He had been socially isolated since moving 
to his sister’s home. Although he did interact with his sister and her family, he 




Chapter 9 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 139 


made no effort to stay in touch with the few friends he had known in New York 
City, nor did he attempt to meet new friends in the neighborhood. In fact, he had 
never been particularly active socially, even during his childhood. His occupa¬ 
tional performance had deteriorated long before he was fired from his job as an 
elevator operator. Several neighbors had complained about his peculiar behav¬ 
ior. For example, one of Colleen’s friends once called to tell her that she had 
been watching Bill as he walked home from the grocery store. He was carrying a 
bag of groceries, clearly mumbling to himself, and moving in a strange pattern. 
He would take two or three steps forward, then one to the side onto the grass 
next to the sidewalk. At this point, Bill would hop once on his left foot, take one 
step forward, and then step back onto the sidewalk and continue the sequence. 
Thinking that this behavior seemed similar to games that children commonly 
play, Colleen asked Bill about his walk home. He told her that each of these 
movements possessed a particular meaning and that he followed this pattern to 
correct scruples that were being placed in his head as he returned from the store. 
This explanation, and his other comments about his scruples, would be consid¬ 
ered an example of magical thinking. Overall, Bill’s delusional beliefs and audi¬ 
tory hallucinations can be seen as an extension of the deterioration that began 
much earlier. 

Schizophrenia is a relatively common disorder, affecting approximately 1 to 
2% of the population (Messias, Chen, & Eaton, 2007; Wu, Birnbaum, Hudson, 
& Kessler, 2006). Although gender differences in prevalence are not large, the 
disorder may affect more men than women. Onset usually occurs during adoles¬ 
cence or early adulthood, but somewhat later for women than for men. The prog¬ 
nosis is mixed. When Emil Kraepelin first defined the disorder (originally known 
as dementia praecox ), he emphasized its chronic deteriorating course. Many 
patients do, in fact, show a gradual decline in social and occupational function¬ 
ing and continue to exhibit psychotic symptoms either continuously or intermit¬ 
tently throughout their lives. However, a substantial number of patients seem 
to recover without signs of residual impairment. Much of the most informative 
data pertaining to prognosis have come from the World Health Organization’s 
International Study of Schizophrenia (Hopper, Harrison, Janca, & Sartorius, 
2007). Compared to people with other mental disorders, such as mood disorders, 
schizophrenics tended to have a worse outcome 20 years after their initial treat¬ 
ment for the disorder. There was substantial overlap between the groups, how¬ 
ever, and considerable variability within the schizophrenic patients. The results 
of this study and several others indicate that roughly 60% of schizophrenic 
patients follow a chronic pattern, and approximately 25% recover within several 
years after the onset of the disorder (Heiden & Hafner, 2000). 

Although people with schizophrenia share some important common char¬ 
acteristics, they are also an extremely heterogeneous group. This feature was 
emphasized in the title of Eugen Bleuler’s classic monograph. Dementia 
Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias (1911/1950). Kraepelin and Bleuler 
both outlined subtypes of schizophrenia, including catatonic, paranoid. 



140 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


hebephrenic, and simple types. Each of these subtypes was defined in terms of a 
few characteristic symptoms. Catatonic patients were identified by their bizarre 
motor movements and the unusual postures they would assume. Their motor 
behavior might include either a rigid posture with total immobility or undirected, 
maniclike excitement. Paranoid patients were those who expressed delusions of 
persecution and reference. The primary features of hebephrenia were taken to 
be inappropriate affect and florid symptomatology (e.g., bizarre delusions and 
hallucinations). Bill would clearly be included in the paranoid subcategory of 
schizophrenic disorders. 

Symptomatically defined subgroups possess a certain intuitive appeal, 
but they have not proved to be particularly useful in other respects (Helmes & 
Landmark, 2003). One major problem has been a lack of reliability in assign¬ 
ing patients to subcategories. Because of problems in identifying the general 
category of schizophrenia, it is not surprising that the subtypes present further 
difficulties. Inconsistency is another drawback; patients who exhibit a particular 
set of prominent symptoms at one point in time may exhibit another set of fea¬ 
tures during a later episode. The symptomatically defined subgroups have also 
not been shown to possess either etiological or predictive validity. For example, 
a specific treatment that is more or less effective with catatonic patients in com¬ 
parison with hebephrenics has not been found. 

Another system for subdividing schizophrenic patients is based on the use 
of three symptom dimensions: psychotic symptoms, negative symptoms, and 
disorganization (Andreasen, Arndt, Alliger, Miller, & Flaum, 1995; O’Leary 
et ah, 2000). Psychotic symptoms include hallucinations and delusions. Negative 
symptoms include blunted or restricted affect, social withdrawal, and poverty of 
speech. Verbal communication problems, such as disorganized speech and bizarre 
behavior, are included in the third symptom dimension, which is called disorgani¬ 
zation. The distinctions among psychotic, negative, and disorganized symptom 
dimensions have generated a considerable amount of interest and research. 

Etiological Considerations 

Genetic factors are clearly involved in the transmission of schizophrenia 
(Mitchell & Porteous, 2010). The most persuasive data supporting this conclu¬ 
sion come from twin studies and investigations following various adoption meth¬ 
ods. Twin studies depend on the following reasoning: Monozygotic (MZ) twins 
develop from a single zygote, which separates during an early stage of growth 
and forms two distinct but genetically identical embryos. In the case of dizy¬ 
gotic (DZ) twins, two separate eggs are fertilized by two sperm cells, and both 
develop simultaneously. Thus, DZ twins share only, on average, 50% of their 
genes, the same as siblings who do not share the same prenatal period. Based 
on the assumption that both forms of twins share similar environments, MZ 
twins should manifest a higher concordance rate (i.e., more often resemble 



Chapter 9 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 141 


each other) for traits that are genetically determined. This is, in fact, the pat¬ 
tern that has now been reported for schizophrenia over a large number of studies 
(Pogue-Geile & Gottesman, 2007). For example, one study conducted in Finland 
reported a concordance rate of 46% for MZ twins and only 9% among DZ twins 
(Cannon, Kaprio, Loennqvist, Huttunen, & Koskenvuo, 1998). This substantial 
difference between MZ and DZ concordance indicates the influence of genetic 
factors. On the other hand, the absence of 100% concordance among the MZ 
twins also indicates that genetic factors do not account for all of the variance. 
The development of the disorder must therefore depend on a dynamic interac¬ 
tion between a genetically determined predisposition and various environmental 
events (Gottesman & Hanson, 2005). 

We do not know how genetic factors interact with environmental events to 
produce schizophrenia. This problem is enormously complex because the envi¬ 
ronmental events in question might take any of several different forms (Walker, 
Kestler, Bollini, & Hochman, 2004). Some investigators have focused on fac¬ 
tors such as nutritional deficiencies or viral infections. One hypothesis suggests 
that prenatal infections increase vulnerability to schizophrenia by disrupting 
brain development in the fetus (e.g., Brown & Derkits, 2010). Another approach 
to environmental events and vulnerability to schizophrenia has focused on inter¬ 
personal relations within the family. Adverse family circumstances during child¬ 
hood may increase the probability of subsequently developing schizophrenia 
among people who are genetically predisposed toward the disorder (Schiffman 
etal.,2001). 

In addition to questions about the causes of the disorder, a considerable 
amount of research has also stressed the family’s influence on the course of the 
disorder. These studies follow the progress of patients who have already been 
treated for schizophrenia, and they are concerned with expressed emotion (EE), 
or the extent to which at least one family member is extremely critical of the 
patient and his or her behavior. The patients are typically followed for several 
months after discharge from the hospital, and the outcome variable is the per¬ 
centage of patients who return to the hospital for further treatment. Relapse rates 
are much higher for patients who returned to high EE homes (Aguilera, Lopez, 
Breitborde, Kopelowicz, & Zarate, 2010; Hooley, 2007). 

The data regarding EE are consistent with Bill’s experience. Bill remem¬ 
bered that when he and his mother were living together, they made each other 
anxious. His descriptions of her behavior indicate that her emotional involve¬ 
ment was excessive, given that he was an adult and capable of greater inde¬ 
pendence; she was always worried about his job, his friends, or what he was 
doing with his time. Her constant intrusions and coaxing finally led him to seek 
refuge with his sister’s family. 

The supportive environment provided by Colleen and her family and their 
willingness to tolerate many of Bill’s idiosyncrasies were undoubtedly helpful in 
allowing Bill to remain outside a hospital during his psychotic episodes. 



142 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Treatment 

There are several important variables to consider in selecting a treatment for 
acute schizophrenic disturbance. Antipsychotic drugs have become the principal 
form of intervention since their introduction in the 1950s (Haddad, Taylor, & 
Niaz, 2009). A large number of carefully controlled studies have demonstrated 
that these drugs have a beneficial effect for many patients with schizophrenia. 
They lead to an improvement in symptoms during acute psychotic episodes. 
Antipsychotic medications also reduce the probability of symptom relapse if 
they are taken on a maintenance basis after the patient has recovered from an 
episode. Unfortunately, some patients, perhaps as many as 25%, do not respond 
positively to antipsychotic medication. 

Antipsychotic medication seems to have a specific effect on many psychotic 
symptoms, such as hallucinations and disorganized speech. In Bill’s case, medi¬ 
cation did have a positive effect. The administration of antipsychotic medication 
was associated with an improvement in his most dramatic symptoms. 

Despite these positive effects, several limitations and some problems are 
also associated with the use of antipsychotic drugs. One problem, which was 
evident in Bill’s case, is that medication is only a partial solution. After the most 
dramatic symptoms have improved, most patients continue to suffer from role 
impairments that are not the direct product of hallucinations and delusions. In 
short, medication can sometimes relieve perceptual aberrations, but it does not 
remove deficiencies in social and occupational skills. 

Another problem arises with treatment-refractory patients. Approximately 
10 to 20% of schizophrenic patients do not benefit from traditional forms of 
antipsychotic medication (Kane, 1996). Others who respond initially will relapse 
repeatedly during maintenance drug treatment. Therefore, pharmaceutical com¬ 
panies continue to develop new forms of medication. Clozapine (Clozaril) and 
risperidone (Risperdal) are examples of the so-called second generation of antip¬ 
sychotic drugs. They are also known as atypical antipsychotic drugs because 
they produce fewer adverse side effects and seem to have a different pharma¬ 
cological mode of action than more traditional antipsychotic drugs. Controlled 
studies of clozapine and risperidone have found significant improvement in 
approximately 30% of patients who were previously considered “treatment 
resistant” (Turner & Stewart, 2006). The availability of these new forms of med¬ 
ication offers new hope for many patients and their families. 

A final problem has been the development of long-term side effects, most 
notably a serious, involuntary movement disorder known as tardive dyskinesia. 
The most obvious signs of tardive dyskinesia include trembling of the extremi¬ 
ties, lip smacking, and protrusions of the tongue. These symptoms can be dis¬ 
concerting to both patients and those with whom they interact. Fortunately, 
atypical antipsychotic drugs are less likely to lead to the development of motor 
side effects such as tardive dyskinesia (Kane, 2004). 

Psychosocial treatment programs are also beneficial for patients with schiz¬ 
ophrenia (Bustillo, Lauriello, Horan, & Keith, 2001). Perhaps most important is 



Chapter 9 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 143 


the use of family-based programs in conjunction with maintenance medication. 
Several studies have evaluated treatment programs designed to help patients with 
families that are rated high in EE (Giron et al., 2010). In addition to antipsy¬ 
chotic medication, treatment typically includes two principal components. First, 
the therapist provides family members with information about schizophrenia, 
on the assumption that some hostility and criticism result from failure to under¬ 
stand the nature of the patient’s problems. Second, the therapist focuses on 
enhancing the family’s ability to cope with stressful experiences by working 
on problem-solving and communication skills. Results with this type of family 
intervention have been very encouraging. 

In Bill’s case, his sister’s family was not high in EE. Direct treatment focused 
on family patterns of communication was therefore unnecessary. The therapist 
did, however, spend time talking with Colleen and Roger about Bill’s situation in 
an effort to help them cope with his idiosyncratic behavior. Bill’s therapist also 
directed his attention to the development of social skills. These efforts met with 
mixed success. Social skills programs are often useful with schizophrenics who 
are being treated on an outpatient basis (Pilling et al., 2002). 

There is also some reason to be cautious about the use of active psycho¬ 
logical approaches to the treatment of patients who are socially withdrawn 
and exhibiting other negative symptoms (e.g., Kopelowicz, Liberman, Mintz, & 
Zarate, 1997). Programs that increase the level of social interaction among 
chronic schizophrenic patients may have adverse effects on other areas of the 
person’s adjustment. Patients with severe, persistent negative symptoms and 
those who are not on medication may not be able to cope with the increase in 
stress that is associated with an active, directive form of social intervention. This 
effect may have been evident in Bill’s case. He was not receiving medication 
until after the therapist became aware of his extensive delusional system. His 
response to the behavioral program seemed to be more positive after the intro¬ 
duction of antipsychotic medication. Prior to that point, the role-playing that was 
attempted during sessions and the homework assignments during the week actu¬ 
ally seemed to increase his level of anxiety. 


Discussion Questions 


1. One simple way to define a delusion is to say that it is false belief. But there 
is more to it than that. How would you describe Bill’s delusional belief about 
the film that had presumably been made about him? What characteristics of 
his belief system were important, beyond the fact that it was not based on 
evidence that could be shared with other people? 

2. What were the earliest symptoms that Bill was beginning to develop a psy¬ 
chotic disorder? Were there any meaningful signs of his disorder prior to 
the onset of hallucinations and delusions? If medication is effective for 
most people who have psychotic symptoms, should it also be prescribed 




144 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 

for people who seem to be vulnerable to schizophrenia? What are the possible 
advantages and disadvantages of this approach to treatment? How could it be 
evaluated? 

3. Given the broad range of symptoms and social deficits that are often associ¬ 
ated with schizophrenia, these patients often need a broad array of services 
and support systems. Other than antipsychotic medication, what are the most 
important forms of mental-health service that would be helpful, both to the 
patients and to their families? 

4 . Who should pay for mental-health services to patients with serious mental 
disorders such as schizophrenia? Should they be included in standard health- 
insurance programs? Should they receive a priority that is comparable to 
other medical disorders, such as cancer and heart disease? 



CHAPTER 10 


Psychotic Disorder (NOS), 
Substance Dependence, 
and Violence 


This case illustrates several difficult and confusing issues that are faced by 
mental-health professionals working in community mental-health settings. The 
woman in this case had been homeless for many months, perhaps several years. 
Many details of her life history were missing because of her chaotic lifestyle. 
Her own descriptions of herself and the events in her life were inconsistent and 
unreliable. She was often psychotic, and she apparently used drugs on a fairly 
regular basis. Because contact with clients who are homeless and seriously men¬ 
tally ill is often sporadic and unpredictable, cases such as this one are hard to 
describe and even more difficult to manage. The information presented in this 
chapter is based on intermittent therapeutic contacts with the woman as well as 
one meeting with her brother, one phone conversation with her daughter, and one 
discussion with a woman who let her stay with her on occasion. 

Angela was 36 years old and had apparently experienced nearly constant 
auditory hallucinations for the past 20 years. It was difficult to know very much 
about the nature of these experiences because she did not like to talk about the 
topic. Angela said that she heard several different voices, mostly males, talking 
about her. The volume, clarity, and emotional tone of the voices varied tremen¬ 
dously. Sometimes they were distinct, loud, and angry. Most of the time, they 
seemed almost like a dull, rumbling noise, running day and night in the back¬ 
ground of her mind. At times, it seemed like listening to a radio talk show with 
the volume turned down. 

Angela also had a long-standing problem with substance dependence, espe¬ 
cially crack cocaine and heroin. Her heavy use of drugs started a few years after 
she had been experiencing hallucinations, and she sometimes used the drugs to 
try to drown out the voices. Angela’s pattern of drug use escalated when her liv¬ 
ing circumstances were most chaotic, when she was least stable emotionally, and 


145 



146 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


when her voices were most intrusive. Of course, it is impossible to untangle the 
direction of these effects; increased stress might have caused Angela to increase 
her consumption of drugs, but she also might have become more disorganized 
because she was using more drugs. 

Many of the people with whom Angela spent her time were people who 
used drugs frequently. She had been drawn into (and also sought out) a social 
world that was dangerous, threatening, and hostile. She frequently spent peri¬ 
ods of several days at a time hanging out in dirty, abandoned buildings with 
groups of other people who were also taking drugs. Her descriptions of these 
experiences were both confusing and frightening. Angela claimed that she had 
witnessed many assaults and more than one murder in such circumstances. Many 
of the other people also engaged in sexual activities, often as a way of earn¬ 
ing money to purchase drugs or in exchange for drugs. According to Angela’s 
description of her own behavior, she was able to obtain heroin and crack by 
conning other people. She denied being a prostitute and said that she did not 
exchange sex for drugs. 

She had been in and out of drug rehabilitation programs many times. She 
had also been arrested once for possession of a small amount of cocaine and 
another time for stabbing a man in the stomach (see below). She had spent 18 
months in prison for the assault before being released on parole and finding her 
way back onto the streets. 

Her typical pattern in rehabilitation was to find a way—usually a desperate 
suicidal threat or gesture—to enter a program, go through detoxification quickly, 
and then leave after a few days (without completing the therapeutic program). 
These experiences usually allowed her to escape an unpleasant circumstance, 
such as living temporarily with a friend who had grown tired of her company. 
They also allowed her to get some relatively undisturbed sleep and to eat a few 
nourishing meals. 

Angela was the mother of three children, two daughters and a son, who 
ranged in age from 20 to 15. They were all raised by Angela’s mother—who lived 
in a neighboring state—because of Angela’s long-standing problems with mental 
illness as well as her legal difficulties. Angela had been unable to visit them for 
many years because one of the conditions of her parole was that she could not 
travel to another state. The oldest child, a daughter, was an honors student at an 
elite, private college. Although Angela had not been able to spend much time with 
her children, she was very proud of them and kept track of their lives through 
intermittent conversations with her mother and one of her brothers. 

Social History 


Angela was born in Philadelphia, the second of four children in a lower-middle- 
class, single-parent family. Her mother had been addicted to heroin as a young 
adult, but she had been free of drugs for many years, certainly since Angela and 




Chapter 10 Psychotic Disorder (NOS), Substance Dependence, and Violence 147 


her siblings were small children. The family lived on disability payments that her 
mother collected as the result of a chronic problem with back pain. Angela’s 
mother was a strong, dependable, and conscientious parent. Her children all 
attended public schools, and they all graduated from high school, even though 
the family endured many difficult financial times. 

Like many of the other students in her high school, Angela drank alcohol 
and smoked marijuana as a teenager. She gave up drinking early because she 
said it “didn’t do anything for her.” She had hoped that it would make the voices 
go away, but it didn’t. She did continue to smoke pot. 

Angela graduated from high school, 1 year after the birth of her first child. 
Although her behavior was often impulsive and unpredictable, she was consid¬ 
ered to be a very bright student. She was talkative in class and made intelligent, 
though occasionally obscure, comments in discussions with other students. 
Angela also liked to write. Teachers in her English classes said that she wrote 
interesting poetry; it was often ethereal and concerned with depressing themes. 

Following graduation, she worked for short periods of time but never at the 
same job for more than 6 months. One of her first jobs was as a clerk for a drug¬ 
store. She was fired for stealing money that she used to buy marijuana. She also 
held several lower-level secretarial positions. Her second and third children were 
born within 3 years after she graduated. Her relationships with the men who 
were the fathers were not stable, and both of these men disappeared from her life 
soon after she learned that she was pregnant. 

Angela’s use of drugs escalated dramatically after the birth of her third 
child, when she was 22. She began smoking crack and heroin. At first, she used 
these drugs separately. Later she began to combine cocaine and heroin into a 
mixture known as a speedball that could be injected. This process seemed to 
enhance the positive subjective feelings. Two motives seemed responsible for 
this change in her use of drugs. One was that her hallucinations had become 
more prominent and distressing. Angela took more drugs to try to quiet the 
voices. The other reason involved a process that she called “chasing the first 
high.” None of her drug experiences ever seemed quite as wonderful as the feel¬ 
ing that she had had the first time she smoked crack. In an effort to be able to 
feel that way again, she kept taking increased doses and different combinations 
of drugs. 

Her behavior became increasingly erratic. She would sometimes show up, 
unannounced, at her mother’s house, asking to spend a few days with the chil¬ 
dren. Then she would disappear again. Her mother and her brothers and sister 
were extremely upset as they watched her health deteriorate, but they were una¬ 
ble to persuade her to change. 

When she was 24 years old, Angela’s mother finally persuaded her to make 
a serious attempt to stop using heroin. She had tried before unsuccessfully, both 
on her own and with friends. She always went back to using within a couple 
of days, unable to bear the symptoms of drug withdrawal. This time, she was 
accepted into a community treatment program. She went to meetings (Narcotics 



148 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Anonymous) as well as a day treatment program, which included group ther¬ 
apy specifically directed at substance abuse and dependence. While she was 
participating in these meetings, she met a man who was also in the program. 
They became romantically involved, and after a few months, Angela began liv¬ 
ing with him at his apartment. She had been off drugs for 4 months at that point. 
Unfortunately, he was a difficult person with many demons of his own, including 
a violent temper. He began to abuse her physically. 

An Episode of Violence 

Angela lived with this man and endured his beatings for a few months. She was 
constantly afraid and physically exhausted. Her voices were becoming more 
prominent once again, as the level of stress increased. At times, they warned 
her about things that her boyfriend was planning to do to her. The voices also 
urged her to protect herself and to get even with him. Frightened and confused, 
Angela left the apartment and began wandering the streets, looking for a way to 
get money so that she could buy heroin and drown out the voices. 

She found herself in a busy area of the city, late at night. The street was 
lined with bars, tourist shops, and all-night markets. Cars were jammed at the 
intersection while many pedestrians were crowded onto the sidewalk. It was very 
noisy—horns honking, people shouting, and music blaring from car stereos and 
the bars. Angela was becoming increasingly agitated, while also feeling frus¬ 
trated and angry about the way she was being treated. Her boyfriend was beat¬ 
ing her. Now the people on the street were bumping and pushing and jumping 
in front of her. Everyone seemed to be taking advantage of her in one way or 
another. As her desperate search for money and drugs wore on, she was feeling 
more irritated, vigilant, and on edge. 

A middle-aged man, who had clearly consumed a lot of alcohol, suddenly 
walked out of a bar and stumbled toward Angela. His speech was slurred, and 
his balance and vision seemed impaired. He mumbled that he would give Angela 
$20 if she hailed a cab for him. She did that. The man moved toward the cab and 
started to get in without giving Angela the money that he had promised. Feeling 
angry because she had been manipulated by him, Angela grabbed his arm and 
demanded her money. He laughed, called her a name, and started to pull away, 
falling backward toward the door of the cab. She became enraged, pulled a small 
knife out of her jacket, and stabbed him in the stomach. As the man screamed 
and collapsed onto the sidewalk, several other people grabbed Angela and pulled 
her to the ground. 

The police arrived within seconds. Angela was handcuffed and driven to the 
nearest police station. Her behavior was wild and erratic. Her mood was unsta¬ 
ble, vacillating quickly among anger, fear, and sadness. Many of the things that 
Angela said were incoherent. She was interviewed by a court-appointed psychia¬ 
trist who met with her once and prescribed antipsychotic medication that could 



Chapter 10 Psychotic Disorder (NOS), Substance Dependence, and Violence 149 


be administered by injection (so that they would be certain that she took it). Her 
mood and behavior improved after she had been in jail for about 10 days. 

Several days later, the judge ordered a competence evaluation. She had 
been charged with aggravated assault, and conviction would carry a sentence of 
up to 5 years in prison (depending on any prior convictions). Before she could 
stand trial, the court had to determine whether Angela was able to understand 
the charges against her and participate in her own defense. The central question 
in this decision was whether or not she was still actively psychotic. By the time 
this interview was conducted, her speech was coherent and her mood was stable. 
She denied hearing voices because she did not want to be sent, on an involuntary 
basis, to a state facility for criminal defendants with mental disorders. The psy¬ 
chiatrist who conducted the evaluation recommended that she was competent to 
stand trial. 

With consultation from the public defender who had been assigned to her 
case, Angela decided to plead guilty to a reduced charge. By this point, her vic¬ 
tim had recovered from his painful wound. She was sentenced to 18 months in 
jail, with the possibility of release on parole for good behavior. Angela was very 
upset during her first few days at the women’s prison. According to the guards, 
she “went crazy.” She had to be put in solitary confinement after she attacked 
another prisoner in her cell. She was not allowed to leave her cell to eat meals 
because she threw food and trays of dishes and could not be restrained. On the 
third day, she set fire to her own cell. Because of her wild, uncontrolled behav¬ 
ior, she was transferred to another institution with a psychiatric ward for people 
convicted of violent crimes. 

The psychiatrist at the prison prescribed antipsychotic medication. Angela’s 
behavior was extremely agitated for the first few days that she was living on the 
ward. She was belligerent and argumentative, frequently picking fights with staff 
members and other patients. Some of her time was spent in physical restraints 
because there was no other way to control her behavior. The medication eventu¬ 
ally helped her calm down. 

Because of her violent and disruptive behavior, Angela served the full 
18-month sentence, some of it in the psychiatric unit and other times in the regu¬ 
lar prison population. When she was finally discharged, she was 26 years old and 
homeless. 

She was released from jail on probation and was required to check with her 
parole officer once a week. Another condition of her parole was that she had to 
remain in treatment for her mental-health problems. 

Angela went to live with her brother for a while, but her behavior was too 
disruptive. She argued with him and his wife several times a day. Her sched¬ 
ule was completely unpredictable. Some days, she would leave home in the late 
afternoon and not return for 2 or 3 days. Other times, she would stay in her room 
for several days, refusing to talk to anyone else. Her brother eventually asked her 
to leave because the stress associated with Angela’s presence was causing too 



150 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


much conflict in his family. He and his wife were also extremely worried about 
the possible negative impact that Angela might have on their young children. 


Community Treatment 


For the next 10 years, Angela moved from place to place. She lived with friends 
at times, and sometimes she stayed on the streets or in community shelters. Now 
and then, she would find a way to gain entrance to another rehabilitation pro¬ 
gram. Access to treatment was not easy. For a person without health insurance 
or any other way to pay for services, Angela had to rely on public programs, 
and these often have extremely long waiting lists and strict criteria for admis¬ 
sion. Very few beds are available in the detoxification programs run by most 
large cities. Angela found two methods that would usually result in immediate 
admission. One was to appear at a public mental-health clinic and make a seri¬ 
ous suicide threat. Once she told the counselor that she was going to jump off a 
bridge. She was admitted later that day. 

Angela continued working on her poetry when she wasn’t too high and 
could find a quiet place to write. She showed some of these poems to her coun¬ 
selor, who was impressed with the quality of her writing. Most of them were 
concerned with the use of drugs, especially how she felt when she stopped tak¬ 
ing them (loneliness, emptiness, darkness, and so on). 

After her release from prison, Angela began to experience occasional peri¬ 
ods of severe depression. These episodes would last anywhere from 2 weeks to 
a month or more. Feelings of hopelessness and guilt would overwhelm her, and 
she would retreat from interactions with other people. Her inability to care for 
her children became a major preoccupation for her during these times. Although 
she was usually a prolific writer, she lost all interest in her journals during these 
episodes. Her appetite was also very poor when she was depressed, but it was 
difficult to know whether that was a symptom of depression or the result of the 
fact that she usually stopped taking drugs when she was severely depressed 
(perhaps because she didn’t have the energy to go out and hustle the money she 
would need to buy the drugs). 

Angela may have also experienced episodes of mania or hypomania. This 
is another issue that was difficult to understand, based on her own description of 
events. There were definitely periods of several days in a row when she would 
sleep very little and become extremely active. However, these were also times 
when she increased her use of illegal drugs, and it is difficult to know whether 
her maniclike behavior was the simple product of cocaine and other stimulants. 

When she was admitted to the community treatment program, Angela was 
assigned two diagnoses on Axis I of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR-, APA, 2000): psychotic disorder not otherwise 
specified (NOS) and substance dependence (opioids). The diagnosis of psy¬ 
chotic disorder NOS is used to describe psychotic symptoms when there is not 




Chapter 10 Psychotic Disorder (NOS), Substance Dependence, and Violence 151 


enough information to make a specific diagnosis, such as schizophrenia, or when 
there is contradictory information. For example, the clinician may not be able to 
determine whether the person’s psychotic symptoms are caused by the ingestion 
of psychoactive substances. It is difficult for clinicians to draw the distinction 
between different diagnostic categories, such as schizophrenia and major depres¬ 
sive disorder with psychotic features, when the person’s self-report is unreliable 
and when it is not clear what the person is like when not taking drugs. 

Angela’s behavior also raised a number of questions about the possible 
diagnosis of one or more personality disorders. Paranoid, antisocial, and narcis¬ 
sistic personality disorders all seemed to be possible diagnoses. She did not trust 
anyone, including members of her own family. Of course, the hostile and threat¬ 
ening world in which she had lived for most of her adult life made it difficult 
to determine whether her vigilance and suspicions were justified. Is this pattern 
entirely irrational for a person who had lived in such difficult circumstances? 
She had undoubtedly been abused and been taken advantage of for many years. 
Unfortunately, her pervasive mistrust also made it difficult to establish a relation¬ 
ship with her in therapy. Her speech was guarded, and she did not confide easily 
in her therapist. 

Because there was no evidence that Angela showed signs of conduct dis¬ 
order as a child, she would not meet the formal diagnostic criteria for antiso¬ 
cial personality disorder. Nevertheless, she did exhibit several other features of 
the disorder, such as a failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful 
behavior. She lied frequently to her therapist, to her family, and to the people 
with whom she spent time on the streets. She was often irritable, aggressive, and 
irresponsible. 

Angela took great pride in her ability to con and manipulate others. For 
example, she once told her therapist that she was terribly afraid of dying. She 
said she was feeling that her physical health was even worse than usual, and 
she cried at great length about this concern. Her specific concern was pancre¬ 
atic cancer, which she claimed to be the cause of death for two close relatives. 
Preliminary tests indicated that she did have a very low glucose level. Upon fur¬ 
ther testing, however, physicians at the clinic were able to determine that Angela 
was intentionally taking too much insulin and thereby inducing these symptoms 
in an effort to gain admission to the hospital. As with many of her other prob¬ 
lems, it was impossible to know whether these characteristics played an active 
role in the original onset of her mental disorder or whether they were the conse¬ 
quences of living in a dangerous and chaotic environment. 

Impulsive and hostile behaviors were also serious problems for Angela. 
Her inability to maintain regular clinic appointments provided only one exam¬ 
ple, She would come to appointments whenever she wanted to be there, and she 
would storm out if the therapist asked her to wait until she was finished with 
her current appointment. Then she would disappear for a few weeks. Her impul- 
sivity was also evident in decisions about housing. She would leave where she 
had been living without giving any thought to where she would go next. Her 



152 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


therapist once spent weeks finding a new home for Angela, and she immedi¬ 
ately provoked a fight with another woman who lived there. She was thrown out 
within a week because she wouldn’t follow any of the rules (not coming in at the 
right time; refusing to help with cleaning and cooking). 


Discussion 


Many people who are seriously mentally ill qualify for more than one specific 
diagnosis. The term dual diagnosis has often been used to describe people who 
would meet the diagnostic criteria for both schizophrenia and substance-use dis¬ 
order (Staiger et ah, 2011). Some estimates indicate that 50% of patients with 
schizophrenia also have a substance-use disorder of some kind (Lewis, 2002). 
The concept of dual diagnosis has drawn needed attention to these issues, 
but it may fail to reflect the overwhelming range of problems that people like 
Angela face. In addition to her problems with psychosis and drug dependence, 
Angela experienced difficulties involving legal issues, physical illness (includ¬ 
ing increased risk of exposure to HIV), and homelessness. The combination of 
psychosis and substance dependence decreases the probability that a person will 
respond positively to treatment and amplifies the severity of social and occupa¬ 
tional impairment associated with either type of disorder on its own. Substance- 
use disorders are often associated with schizophrenia and depression, especially 
among people who are homeless (North et al., 1997). 

Homelessness is an important and difficult problem that is often associated 
with mental disorders. Substance abuse and medication noncompliance (failure 
to take prescribed drugs) are both associated with an increased risk for home¬ 
lessness among patients with schizophrenia. Being homeless leaves the person 
more vulnerable to many other negative environmental events. Women like 
Angela who are seriously mentally ill and homeless are often victims of sex¬ 
ual assault and physical violence (Friedman & Loue, 2007; Gearson, Kaltman, 
Brown, & Bellack, 2003). 

According to DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000), people who exhibit psychotic 
symptoms but do not meet the specific criteria for a disorder, such as schizo¬ 
phrenia, may be given a diagnosis of psychotic disorder not otherwise specified 
(NOS). One example is the presence of persistent auditory hallucinations in the 
absence of other features of schizophrenia. Angela admitted hearing voices on 
a continuous basis for several years, but she did not like to talk about them, 
and her descriptions of these experiences were rather vague. Criterion 1 for 
schizophrenia requires that the person exhibit two or more types of psychotic 
symptoms, such as hallucinations, delusional beliefs, disorganized speech, cata¬ 
tonic behavior, or negative symptoms (such as affective flattening). Angela did 
not exhibit any of these other symptoms of schizophrenia. According to DSM- 
IV-TR (APA, 2000), only one symptom is required in Criterion 1 if the halluci¬ 
nations conform to a certain description, such as a voice keeping up a running 




Chapter 10 Psychotic Disorder (NOS), Substance Dependence, and Violence 153 


commentary on the person’s behavior. This might have been true in Angela’s 
case, but it was difficult to be certain of their character. Therefore, the diagnosis 
remained ambiguous, and psychotic disorder NOS provided the most accurate 
description of her condition. 

Similar NOS options are available for mood disorders, eating disorders, 
personality disorders, and most of the other general headings in the diagnostic 
manual. The NOS categories are used to describe people who experience signifi¬ 
cant distress or social impairment but whose symptoms fall outside the official 
diagnostic boundaries. These options indicate that the categories defined in the 
manual do not provide an exhaustive description of all forms of mental disorder. 

Another possible diagnosis for Angela’s condition would have been 
schizoaffective disorder. This concept is used to describe patients who present a 
mixture of symptoms that fall on the boundary between schizophrenia and mood 
disorder with psychotic features (Cheniaux et al., 2008). In DSM-IV-TR (APA, 
2000), the diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder is restricted to the description of 
a single episode rather than a lifetime diagnosis. Therefore, when her condition 
was viewed from a broad perspective over a period of several years, Angela’s 
diagnosis would be psychotic disorder NOS or perhaps schizophrenia. If a clini¬ 
cian looked only at a specific episode, however, she might have been assigned a 
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. The DSM-IV-TR criteria for schizoaffective 
disorder (APA, 2000, p. 323) include the following: 

1. An uninterrupted period of illness during which, at some time, there is 
either a major depressive episode, a manic episode, or a mixed episode 
concurrent with symptoms that meet Criterion 1 for schizophrenia. 

2. During the same period of illness, there have been delusions or hallucina¬ 
tions for at least 2 weeks in the absence of prominent mood symptoms. 

3. Symptoms that meet criteria for a mood episode are present for a substantial 
portion of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness. 

4. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance 
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition. 

Angela would have fit this description during some of her episodes of 
depression, when she also experienced auditory hallucinations. Note that this 
diagnosis would require the inference that she met Criterion 1 for the definition 
of schizophrenia (which was uncertain because of the ambiguous nature of her 
auditory hallucinations). 


Etiological Considerations 

Research studies indicate that schizoaffective disorder is a heterogeneous cate¬ 
gory (Cheniaux et al., 2008). Most of the evidence suggests that genetic factors 
play a role in its development. Family history studies suggest that schizoaf¬ 
fective disorder does, in fact, represent a form of psychosis that is intermedi¬ 
ate between schizophrenia and mood disorders. The first-degree relatives of 



154 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


people with schizoaffective disorder show an increased risk for schizophrenia, 
compared to the relatives of people with mood disorders. They also show an 
increased risk for mood disorder, compared to relatives of people with schizo¬ 
phrenia (Bertelsen & Gottesman, 1995). 

Angela’s case also raises interesting questions about the analysis of spe¬ 
cific symptoms rather than global diagnosis categories. Her most long-standing 
symptoms were auditory hallucinations; she had been hearing voices that were 
not really there for many years. Hallucinations, or perceptual experiences in the 
absence of external stimulation, are associated with many kinds of disorders, 
including some that are mental disorders and many that are not. They are also 
found in some people without mental disorders. One study of people in the gen¬ 
eral population (i.e., people who are not patients) found that 39% reported some 
type of hallucinatory experience, when that category was defined broadly to 
include hallucinations in any sensory modality (hearing, vision, taste, and smell) 
as well as “out-of-body experiences.” Most people who reported hallucinations 
said that they had this type of experience less than once a month. Only 2% expe¬ 
rienced hallucinations more than once a week (Ohayon, 2000). 

The mechanisms that are responsible for auditory hallucinations are not 
entirely clear. Clinical scientists who study hallucinations have focused on two 
complementary views of these phenomena. Each view is focused on a different 
level of analysis. One focuses at the level of neurochemical events in the brain. 
Brain-imaging studies indicate that auditory hallucinations are associated with 
abnormal patterns of neural activation in extended auditory pathways of the 
brain (Allen, Lorai, McGuire, & Aleman, 2008). These include areas of the tem¬ 
poral lobes and the prefrontal cortex. Another approach to studying hallucina¬ 
tions has focused on psychological factors or the mental mechanisms that are 
associated with neural activities. Cognitive studies suggest that patients who 
experience hallucinations make errors in attributing internal sensations to exter¬ 
nal events (Laroi & Woodward, 2007). In other words, these people may have 
trouble distinguishing between their own thoughts and voices coming from other 
people (Johns et al., 2001). 

Violence and Mental Disorders 

The connection between mental disorders and violence has been a controversial 
topic for many years. Unfortunately, many laypeople hold the mistaken belief 
that most people with disorders such as schizophrenia are more likely to com¬ 
mit crimes of violence, such as murder and assault (Harris & Lurigio, 2007; 
Pescosolida, Monahan, Link, Stueve, & Kikuzawa, 1999). This belief may be 
partially responsible for the stigma—a sign of shame or discredit leading to 
social rejection—associated with mental disorders. Of course, most people with 
schizophrenia and other major forms of mental disorder are not violent or unusu¬ 
ally aggressive, and most violent crimes are committed by people who do not 
have a mental disorder (Stuart & Arboleda-Florez, 2001). 



Chapter 10 Psychotic Disorder (NOS), Substance Dependence, and Violence 155 


It is not accurate to say, however, that mental disorders are not associated 
with an increased risk for violence. People who have been treated for mental dis¬ 
orders represent an extremely heterogeneous group. Some specific combinations 
of symptoms are associated with greater risk for violence. For example, patients 
with diagnoses of schizophrenia and mood disorders are not more violent than 
others living in the same community, unless they also have substance-use dis¬ 
orders. Problems with substance dependence and abuse increase the rate of 
violence in both groups, especially people with mental disorders (Steadman 
et al., 1998). People who have co-occurring problems with major mental disorders 
and drugs or alcohol are much more likely to engage in aggressive or violent behav¬ 
ior. Therefore, the combination of these problems, rather than schizophrenia or 
depression alone, leads to a serious increase in dangerousness (Walsh et al., 2004). 

Personality disorders are also related to the risk for violent behavior. 
Patients with a major mental disorder, such as schizophrenia, who also exhibit 
features of antisocial personality disorder are more likely to be violent toward 
other people (Monahan, 2001; Nestor, 2002). In addition to antisocial traits, 
people who meet the diagnostic criteria for paranoid and borderline personal¬ 
ity disorder may also be more aggressive and dangerous than others, particularly 
in the presence of problems with alcohol and drug use (Tardiff, 2001). Angela 
had exhibited features of antisocial personality, especially aggression and impul¬ 
siveness, for many years. Her impulsiveness seemed to contribute to her sub¬ 
stance dependence. It also exacerbated problems encountered by her therapist in 
attempting to maintain consistent contact with Angela and trying to arrange for 
stable housing and employment. 

Men are much more likely to be aggressive and violent than women. 
Nevertheless, research studies indicate that the association among mental ill¬ 
ness, drugs, and violence applies to both men and women (Thomson, Bogue, 
Humphreys, & Johnstone, 2001). For example, one study conducted in Finland 
(a country with a low crime rate compared to the United States) examined rates 
of mental disorder among women who had been convicted of murder. These 
women were more likely than women in the community to meet the criteria for 
schizophrenia. Problems with substance dependence and antisocial personality 
disorder were also common in this group of women (Eronen, 1995). 

Specific types of psychotic symptoms also seem to be associated with vio¬ 
lent behavior. Prominent among these are command hallucinations—in which 
the person hears a voice telling him or her to perform a particular action. 
Patients who hear a voice telling them to harm someone else may follow that 
instruction (Braham, Trower, & Birchwood, 2004). Violent behavior is particu¬ 
larly likely when a patient is agitated, actively psychotic, and is using drugs and 
not receiving treatment for his or her condition (Swanson et al., 1997). Some 
experts also believe that patients with paranoid delusions are more dangerous 
than other patients. Delusions can influence a person’s propensity toward vio¬ 
lence because they shape his or her interpretation of situations. People who feel 
threatened by others may believe that a violent response is justified. Although 



156 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Angela did not report paranoid delusions, it seems likely that she did feel threat¬ 
ened by the man she stabbed. It is, of course, impossible to know what her 
voices might have seemed to be saying to her in that moment. 

The victims of acts of violence committed by people with mental disor¬ 
ders are most often family members and friends. Angela’s assault was there¬ 
fore somewhat unusual. It is also understandable, however, in the sense that the 
man she stabbed had provoked her. This is not to say the assault was justified, 
but rather that he had, in fact, taken advantage of her. When she protested, he 
responded in a hostile and disrespectful manner. She was in a desperate emo¬ 
tional state. She was not high on drugs at the time, but she was going through 
withdrawal and actively seeking the drug. This was a particularly unfortunate 
time for him to take advantage of her and then insult her. 

Treatment 

Many men and women who are seriously mentally ill are often confined to 
jails rather than treated in hospitals. Fazel and Danesh (2002) reviewed a large 
number of studies that examined the prevalence of psychopathology among 
prison inmates in 12 different countries (more than 22,000 prisoners) and found 
that 3 to 7% of male prisoners and 4% of female prisoners had psychotic dis¬ 
orders. Ten percent of men and 12% of women in prison suffered from major 
depressive disorder. In another study in the United States of more than 1,200 
incarcerated women who were awaiting trial, more than 80% met the criteria for 
at least one type of mental disorder, with the most common diagnosis being sub¬ 
stance abuse or dependence (Teplin, Abram, & McClelland, 1996). These data 
indicate the dramatic need to identify people with mental disorders in jails and 
prisons and to provide them with treatment for their disorders. 

Patients such as Angela require a broad array of treatment services. Because 
most patients continue to experience occasional episodes of acute psychosis, 
hospital beds are necessary. The typical duration of a hospital admission is less 
than 2 weeks, so mental-health services must also be available in the community 
following discharge. Many states have closed public psychiatric hospitals. One 
paradoxical effect of these closings is that the cost of care for patients who are 
seriously mentally ill has increased because they must be admitted to emergency 
facilities at other hospitals (Rothbard, Schinnar, Hadley, Foley, & Kuno, 1998). 

Treatment guidelines for patients with schizoaffective disorder indicate 
that symptoms of psychosis, such as hallucinations, and symptoms of mood 
disorder should be given equal emphasis in planning the patient’s treatment 
(Levinson, Umapathy, & Musthaq, 1999). Antipsychotic medication is obviously 
one important consideration in this regard. Atypical antipsychotic drugs, such 
as clozapine, olanzapine, and risperidone, have been shown to be effective for 
patients with schizoaffective disorder (Baethge, 2003; Janicak et al., 2001). The 
newer, atypical forms of antipsychotics are beneficial in treating both psychotic 
symptoms and mood-disorder symptoms. Nevertheless, many patients receive 



Chapter 10 Psychotic Disorder (NOS), Substance Dependence, and Violence 157 


more than one type of medication, and combination treatments have increased 
in recent years. Patients with schizophrenia are often prescribed antidepressants 
and mood stabilizers in addition to antipsychotic drugs. As many as 25% may 
also receive more than one type of antipsychotic medication at the same time 
(Clark, Bartels, Mellman, & Peacock, 2002). 

Failure to take antipsychotic drugs as prescribed (medication noncompliance) 
is often associated with repeated episodes of psychosis and the need for readmis¬ 
sion to the hospital (Perkins, 2002). Many of these patients are admitted after 
they have engaged in highly disruptive or dangerous behaviors (such as exhibit¬ 
ing extremely bizarre behavior, attempting suicide, or threatening other people). 
The use of atypical antipsychotic medication may help to reduce noncompliance 
because the side effects associated with these drugs are much less troublesome 
than those associated with traditional or classic forms of antipsychotic medication. 

Violent patients present an important risk to mental-health workers while the 
patients are in treatment. They are also more likely than other patients to be aggres¬ 
sive and violent after they return to the community. Those who remain involved in 
outpatient treatment are less likely to engage in further violent behavior than those 
who drop out of treatment (Elbogen, Van Dorn, Swanson, Swartz, & Monahan, 
2006). The most direct approach to treating violent patients with mental disorders is 
to address their psychotic symptoms. This is often done through the use of medica¬ 
tion. Outcome studies indicate that atypical antipsychotic drags, especially clozap¬ 
ine, produce a reduction in violent behavior at the same time that patients show an 
improvement in their clinical condition (Citrome & Volavka, 2000). 

The management of substance dependence among psychotic patients is 
an extremely difficult problem that has received increased attention in recent 
years (Tiet & Mausbach, 2007). Unfortunately, treatment services for these two 
domains—psychosis and substance-use disorders—are often not integrated. Too 
often, patients must work within two separate systems, with different goals and 
different staff members. They may attend an outpatient mental-health clinic to 
receive antipsychotic medication and psychosocial rehabilitation aimed at symp¬ 
toms associated with schizophrenia. And they may be expected to participate 
in self-help or 12-step programs, such as Narcotics Anonymous or Alcoholics 
Anonymous, for their problems with drugs or alcohol. The latter type of pro¬ 
gram may present special problems for people with a psychotic disorder because 
they have an inflexible goal (total abstinence from drugs and alcohol) and 
because they are sometimes opposed to the use of medication, important efforts 
are underway to develop special, integrated treatment programs that can simulta¬ 
neously address the many complex needs of patients such as Angela. 


Discussion Questions 


1. Angela clearly suffered from a wide variety of problems that involved symp¬ 
toms associated with many different diagnostic categories in DSM-IV-TR. If 




158 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 

you were in charge of her treatment, which do you think were most important 
or central? Where would you start in terms of trying to begin to help her? 

2. Patients who qualify for more than one diagnosis represent the most severely 
disturbed and least-understood people being treated by mental-health service 
providers. What do you think are the most important barriers to understand¬ 
ing and serving the needs of these people? 

3. Auditory hallucinations were a prominent part of Angela’s symptom profile. 
Should research on the causes and treatment of mental disorders focus on 
specific symptoms, such as hallucinations, rather than diagnostic categories 
(such as schizoaffective disorder)? Or would that effort be similar to trying to 
study the origins of fever, which is symptomatic of many different kinds of 
medical illness? 

4 . Some psychotic patients do not want to take medication because they do 
not have insight into the nature of their disorder. Others find that it does not 
improve their symptoms, and many find the side effects troublesome. Should 
psychotic patients be forced to take medication, even if they do not want to 
take it, especially if there is some reason to believe that they may become 
violent? 



CHAPTER 11 


Alcohol Dependence 


Grace Patterson decided to call a psychologist. Dr. Lawton, about her husband, 
Michael. She was worried about his history of heavy drinking, which had esca¬ 
lated recently. Dr. Lawton suggested that she talk to Michael about her concerns. 
He recommended that she pick a time when Michael had not been drinking. She 
should tell him that she had spoken to a psychologist who agreed to see Michael 
for an evaluation and make recommendations. 

Grace called again several weeks later. Michael had refused to consider the 
possibility of seeing a psychologist. Grace had no idea what to do next, so Dr. 
Lawton scheduled an appointment to meet with her alone. They discussed ways 
Grace could change her interactions with Michael to motivate him to enter treat¬ 
ment. She was instructed to describe calmly to him the negative consequences 
of his drinking and to express how concerned she was about it. Grace and Dr. 
Lawton identified several recent incidents and rehearsed how she could respond. 
For example, several weeks ago Michael and Grace had dinner plans with 
another couple, but by late afternoon Michael was too drunk to go out. Grace 
had to call the other couple and make an excuse about canceling the dinner. That 
evening they had a huge argument about his drinking. Whenever Michael was 
really drunk, it was impossible to have a reasoned conversation with him, espe¬ 
cially about his drinking. In the future, Grace was to wait until the next morn¬ 
ing and then express her concerns about the drinking and how this pattern might 
cause them to lose good friends. The problem was ruining their marriage. 

A month later, Grace called Dr. Lawton to say that there had been no 
change in Michael’s drinking. She described several occasions in which she had 
talked with him about the destructive effects his drinking was having on their 
lives. Although Grace was discouraged. Dr. Lawton persuaded her to continue 
the plan. Three weeks later, Grace called to make an appointment for both her 
and Michael to come in for the evaluation. They had a terrible fight the night 
before; Michael had raised his hand to hit her but held back at the last second. 
This incident apparently alarmed Michael as much as it frightened Grace, and so 
he finally agreed to come in. 


159 



160 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Dr. Lawton greeted Michael and Grace in the waiting room and invited 
them into his office. One primary goal of the initial session was to avoid scar¬ 
ing Michael out of therapy. Dr. Lawton explained that he understood his reluc¬ 
tance to come for the appointment. He told him that the purpose of this session 
was to gather information about his drinking habits and any problems that alco¬ 
hol might be causing. Toward the end of the session, if Michael wanted to, they 
could discuss treatment options. 

Michael was drinking heavily on a daily basis, beginning after work and 
continuing into the evening. On weekends, he typically started to drink around 
noon and was intoxicated by dinner. He recognized that his drinking was out of 
control and that it was having adverse effects on both him and his wife. They 
had begun arguing frequently. On several occasions, Michael had broken dishes 
and punched holes in walls. The couple now saw friends infrequently. Michael’s 
high blood pressure had been worsened by the alcohol. Toward the end of the 
session, when the issue of treatment was raised, Michael said that he knew he 
should cut back on his drinking but that he did not really want to stop entirely. 
He knew that abstinence was the goal of alcohol treatment programs like 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), and he did not want to become totally abstinent. 
At this point. Dr. Lawton explained that some treatments are focused on making 
changes that lead to moderate drinking. Michael seemed interested in this pos¬ 
sibility. The session ended with Michael agreeing to consider entering treatment. 
A week later, he called and scheduled another appointment. 


Social History 


Michael’s childhood was rather uneventful. His father was an electrical engineer, 
and his mother worked part time in a local library when Michael and his older 
brother, James, were in school. Michael’s mother and father were very light 
drinkers—an occasional beer or glass of wine. Michael recalled that his older 
brother was closer to their father than Michael. James shared his father’s inter¬ 
est in electronic projects, and the two of them often worked together. Michael, 
in contrast, had little interest and even less aptitude for electronics. He was more 
interested in reading, particularly about history. 

Michael made excellent grades in elementary, middle, and high school. In 
high school, he was also on the wrestling team. He began drinking then, usu¬ 
ally at parties on the weekends. He recalled that he found drinking relaxing and 
that it reduced his anxiety in social situations. He remembered that he was most 
nervous around women; he often felt tongue-tied and felt unable to talk with 
them. 

He graduated from high school and went to a small college, where he 
majored in history and education. His goal was to become a high school his¬ 
tory teacher. His drinking increased somewhat in college, both in amount and 
frequency. It was no longer confined to weekends, and he typically drank six 




Chapter 11 Alcohol Dependence 161 


or more beers at a sitting. As he had said about his drinking in high school, he 
reported that he drank mostly to relax. He maintained a decent GPA but recalled 
that his anxieties around women persisted. He met Grace at college in an art his¬ 
tory class. They were immediately attracted to each other. Grace’s social and 
conversational skills put Michael at ease, and they began seeing each other regu¬ 
larly. They married at the end of college. 

Michael took a job teaching high school history, and Grace found work at 
a jewelry store. They lived in an apartment for two years, saving money for the 
down payment on a house. Because he aspired to become head of the history 
department or perhaps get into school administration, Michael enrolled in an 
evening graduate program at a local university to work on his master's degree. 
Michael recalled this as a very happy time. He and Grace were deeply in love. 

He was drinking regularly now, a couple of scotches before dinner on 
weekdays and the usual scotches plus wine with dinner on the weekends. Grace 
joined her husband in a scotch before dinner, but only one. Michael remembered 
that when he and Grace went out for dinner with friends, he would wolf down 
two drinks before dinner while everyone else had only one. And when they were 
at a party, Michael would generally drink considerably more than anyone else. 
He claimed he needed the alcohol to feel at ease in social situations. 

This drinking pattern continued for several years. During this time, Michael 
finished his master’s degree, and he and Grace had a child, Ethan. The couple 
bought a small house, and life continued smoothly for the most part. Four years 
later, the position of head of the history department opened, and Michael applied 
for the job. When he didn't get it, he was both crushed and very angry. His 
drinking began to increase. He would secretly freshen up his scotch when Grace 
was out of the room, so he was probably having three or four instead of his usual 
two. After a while, Grace noticed that they were buying liquor more often and 
began to suspect that Michael was drinking heavily. When she confronted him, 
he angrily denied it and changed his drinking pattern. 

Now he began drinking on the way home from work. He would stop at a 
liquor store, buy a half pint of brandy, and drink it on the way home. He was 
careful to vary the liquor stores he stopped at and took back routes home to 
reduce the chance of being stopped by a police officer. Before getting home, he 
put the empty bottle in the trunk of his car, ate a breath mint, and was ready to 
greet Grace and start in on the scotch. He began to fall asleep, possibly pass¬ 
ing out, regularly after dinner. His after-work drinking led him to give up his 
afternoon racquetball games, and he no longer was able to do anything after din¬ 
ner. He started forgetting appointments he had made. For example, friends might 
call to invite Michael and Grace to a movie or dinner, but the next day Michael 
had no memory of the call. Friends stopped calling as often. During this period, 
Grace was becoming increasingly upset. She was interacting less and less with 
Michael, and she was coming to believe that he must be drinking secretly. After 
several months, Grace became fairly certain that Michael must be drinking out¬ 
side the home. One day, she checked his trunk and found a dozen empty brandy 



162 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


bottles. Beside herself with anger and anxiety, she confronted him, and an ugly 
argument ensued—the first of many. Michael became even more secretive about 
his drinking, now throwing the empties away before arriving home, but his 
drinking did not decrease. He realized his drinking was out of control and tried 
several times to cut back. Unfortunately, his resolve lasted only a day or two. 


Treatment 


During the first session, Dr. Lawton and Michael discussed treatment options in 
more detail. Michael was adamant that he wanted to cut down rather than quit 
completely. Dr. Lawton told him that while he thought abstinence was a better 
goal, he was willing to help Michael reduce his consumption. To help Michael 
regain control of drinking. Dr. Lawton insisted on a month of abstinence first. 
While Michael showed signs of increased tolerance for alcohol, he had not expe¬ 
rienced withdrawal symptoms; therefore, quitting “cold turkey” appeared to be 
a safe procedure. Michael reluctantly agreed to this period of abstinence. They 
also discussed the positive and negative consequences of his drinking. Somewhat 
surprisingly, Michael was hard pressed to come up with much in the way of pos¬ 
itives. He said that alcohol had allowed him to cope with stress in the past, but 
now it had just become a habit, a way of filling time. Their discussion of nega¬ 
tive consequences produced a long list—marital problems, loss of friends, giving 
up hobbies and interests, and the fact that his high blood pressure was undoubt¬ 
edly worsened by alcohol. Dr. Lawton also provided normative information 
about the amounts people typically drank. Michael was surprised at how much 
he deviated from the average. 

Both Grace and Michael were present for the next session. They discussed 
ways for Michael to cope with abstinence. Dr. Lawton pointed out that urges 
to drink would pass with time, especially if Michael could engage in some 
alternative activities. Michael was taught to think past the urge and to focus on 
the longer-term consequences of heavy drinking. In therapy sessions, he prac¬ 
ticed how to imagine longer-term consequences of getting drunk, such as being 
arrested for drunk driving, ruining his marriage, and losing friends. Together 
they planned a number of strategies to keep Michael busy after work. He 
decided to help out with the wrestling team at school and also return to playing 
racquetball. If neither of these activities was possible on a given day, Michael 
was to stay later at work and grade papers or revise lectures. If he was having 
difficulty controlling his urges, he was to call Grace. Michael agreed to have 
Grace remove all alcohol from their home, and the couple came up with a list 
of things they could do to fill the time that he would have previously spent 
drunk or “asleep.” These involved social activities such as going to the movies 
with friends, renting a film to watch at home, playing bridge, and going out for 
dinner. 




Chapter 11 Alcohol Dependence 163 


Over the next several weeks, Michael met with Dr. Lawton twice a week, 
with Grace present at some of the sessions. Michael was able to maintain absti¬ 
nence and followed through on the plan to become involved in alternative activ¬ 
ities. He had experienced cravings, mostly after work and in the evening, but 
they were not too severe. The cravings were nothing like those he had experi¬ 
enced when he had quit smoking. He described them as rather vague hungers, 
“like when you’re sort of hungry but don’t know what you really want.’’ During 
these sessions, Michael was also taught deep muscle relaxation as a way to cope 
with the negative emotions that he experienced with the urge to drink. 

After the abstinence period was over, alcohol was reintroduced. Michael 
agreed to have no more than two drinks per day, which had to be carefully meas¬ 
ured in contrast to his earlier practice of just filling a highball glass with scotch. 
He also agreed to drink only in Grace’s company. Drinks were now to be sipped, 
and a 20-minute waiting period had to elapse between drinks. Michael reported 
that he was enjoying his new activities, especially the racquetball and renewing 
old friendships. 

The moderate drinking pattern seemed well established in about a month, 
so the frequency of sessions was reduced. Over the next months, Michael and 
Dr. Lawton continued to discuss Michael’s efforts to cope with urges. They also 
began to discuss the possibility of relapse. Dr. Lawton distinguished between a 
lapse—drinking too much on a single day—and relapse—returning completely 
to his old pattern. Dr. Lawton pointed out that while lapses would likely occur, a 
lapse would not mean that all of Michael’s progress had been lost. They also dis¬ 
cussed the need for continuing treatment and attending meetings of a local group 
of recovering alcohol abusers. The group was similar to AA but with less discus¬ 
sion of religion and less emphasis on abstinence as the only solution to alcohol 
abuse. Michael agreed to attend meetings and treatment was ended. 


Follow-Up 


Three years later, Dr. Lawton received another call from Grace, who told him 
that Michael had returned to heavy drinking. She and Michael had discussed 
returning to treatment, but he was reluctant, saying that it clearly hadn’t worked 
the first time. Dr. Lawton suggested that she try to get Michael to call him. 
Michael called several days later and reiterated his belief that treatment had 
failed. He said that he had started drinking heavily when he had again been 
passed over for a promotion and then had just slipped back into his old pattern. 
Dr. Lawton pointed out that maintaining moderate drinking for several years was 
not really a failure. He told Michael that he believed treatment could again help 
but that they would need to attend more carefully to maintaining treatment gains 
this time. Sensing his continuing reluctance to return to treatment. Dr. Lawton 
told him that because his drinking had only been out of control for a short time, 




164 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


a period of abstinence would not be necessary this time. Michael agreed to come 
for a session with Grace. 

Grace was the first to speak. Tearfully, she explained that Michael was 
drinking heavily again. Michael sat quietly, head down, as Grace related recent 
events. She indicated that she wasn’t sure she could get through another pro¬ 
longed episode of the problems that always occurred when Michael was drink¬ 
ing. She was considering divorce. Michael didn't disagree with anything Grace 
said. He wanted to try treatment again, and would make an effort to stay sober. 

Treatment was similar to before, but there was no period of abstinence. 
Michael was quickly able to reestablish a pattern of moderate drinking. In addi¬ 
tion, a lot of time was spent discussing Michael’s reaction about being passed 
over for promotion. Michael’s view of this event was that it was a catastrophe 
and proved how worthless he was. Dr. Lawton worked with Michael to help him 
see it as unfortunate but not a complete disaster. Michael admitted that after 
therapy had concluded before, he had not followed through with the suggestion 
to attend group meetings. As with the first therapy, the last sessions were spent 
discussing maintenance of the gains that had been achieved. Michael insisted 
that he would attend group meetings this time, and Dr. Lawton agreed to con¬ 
tinue to see him once a month. Michael was also told to call Dr. Lawton and 
schedule a meeting if he drank heavily for more than two days in a row. 

Michael continued to see Dr. Lawton for the next 6 months. Although he had a 
couple of lapses, for the most part, he maintained moderate drinking and attended 
group meetings regularly. But then he began to cancel appointments and missed 
several without calling. At the end of a year. Dr. Lawton closed the case. 

Two years later, Grace called to say the old pattern had returned. This time 
Michael was unwilling even to call Dr. Lawton. She was filing for divorce. 
She felt depressed and wanted to schedule some therapy sessions. These ses¬ 
sions dealt mostly with her feelings about Michael. Grace was not clinically 
depressed, but she was indeed experiencing considerable distress. Michael 
continued to drink heavily, and Grace finally ordered him out of the house. 
Shortly thereafter, Michael had a major heart attack and died. Therapy with Grace 
continued for several months, focusing on her distress and guilt over his death. 


Discussion 


According to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM- 
IV-TR\ APA, 2000), the maladaptive use of various substances falls into two 
categories: substance dependence and substance abuse. Alcohol dependence is 
diagnosed if the person meets three of the following criteria: 

• Withdrawal symptoms (negative psychological and physical effects) appear 
if the person stops drinking. 




Chapter 11 Alcohol Dependence 165 


• Tolerance develops. The person needs to drink more and more alcohol to 
produce the desired effect. 

• The person uses more alcohol than intended or uses it for a longer time than 
intended. 

• The person wants to reduce alcohol consumption and may have unsuccess¬ 
fully tried to cut down or stop. 

• Much time is spent trying to obtain alcohol or recover from its effects. 

• Alcohol use continues despite psychological or physical problems caused 
by it. 

• Participation in many activities (work, recreation, social) is reduced because 
of the drug. 

Alcohol dependence can be diagnosed as being accompanied with physi¬ 
ological dependence if either tolerance or withdrawal is present. Physiological 
dependence is what many people mean when they use the term addiction. 

Alcohol abuse, a less serious disorder, is diagnosed if one of the following 
is present: 

• Failure to fulfill major obligations due to recurrent drinking, for example, 
absences from work 

• Repeated exposure to physical dangers while drinking, such as driving 
while intoxicated (DWI) 

• Legal problems due to drinking, such as disorderly conduct or DWI 

• Continued drinking despite persistent social problems, such as arguments 
with spouse 

Michael clearly met the criteria for alcohol dependence. He had developed 
tolerance, recognized that he was drinking too much, had unsuccessfully tried 
to cut back, given up activities that he had previously enjoyed, and continued to 
drink despite knowing that it was creating serious marital problems and contrib¬ 
uting to his high blood pressure. 

Lifetime prevalence rates for alcohol dependence are 17.4% for men and 8.0% 
for women (Hasin, Stinson, Ogburn, & Grant, 2007), making it one of the most 
prevalent mental disorders. In the United States, alcohol abuse and dependence is 
more prevalent among Whites than among African Americans (Breslau et al., 2006). 
Alcohol dependence is less common than alcohol abuse (Somers, Goldner, Waraich, 
& Hsu, 2004). The path to the development of alcohol problems is somewhat vari¬ 
able. Some people, like Michael, progress steadily from moderate use to heavy use 
and then to abuse and dependence. But for many others, the pattern is less regular. 
For example, some people abuse alcohol during a time of stress and then return to 
light drinking when the stress has resolved (Vaillant, 1996). After a person becomes 
dependent, however, the disorder is often chronic. For example, in one study, two- 
thirds of men with alcohol dependence were still dependent 5 years later (Schuckit 
et al., 2001). Some people who are dependent are able to stop drinking without 



166 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


treatment (Bischof, Rumpf, Hapke, Meyer, & John, 2003). Those who maintain 
abstinence from alcohol for 3 years are very likely to remain abstinent for the rest of 
their lives (Vaillant, 2003). Heavy drinkers were more likely to report that negative 
consequences from their drinking led them to stop, whereas those with less severe 
alcohol use reported that they stopped drinking due to changes in their living situ¬ 
ations, such as a move, getting older, or having children (Cunningham, Blomqvist, 
Koski-Jannes, & Cordingley, 2005). This was the case with Michael—his motiva¬ 
tion to stop his heavy drinking came from the negative consequences it was causing 
in his relationship with Grace, rather than a situational change. 

Many people with alcohol dependence have comorbid major depression 
(Wang & El-Guebaly, 2004), especially those who are divorced, separated, 
or widowed, and those with lower incomes. The more alcohol one consumes, 
the higher the risk for a number of health problems, including cancer (of the 
mouth, esophagus, liver, and breast), stroke, heart disease, and diabetes (Room, 
Babor, & Rehm, 2005). This is reflected in Michael’s fatal heart attack. Many 
people who are dependent on alcohol have malnutrition and vitamin deficien¬ 
cies because the alcohol’s calories replace calories from food (Manari, Preedy & 
Peters, 2003). Chronic alcohol dependence can result in shrinking of the brain, 
particularly in frontal lobe areas contributing to problem solving, judgment, and 
reasoning (Rosenbloom, Sullivan, & Pfefferbaum, 2003). 

Etiological Considerations 

Alcohol dependence is a complex disorder with multiple causes. These causes 
include multiple genes that interact with each other and with environmental fac¬ 
tors (Edenberg & Foroud, 2006). About half of the causal influences for alco¬ 
hol dependence are thought to be genetic, and half environmental (Sartor et al., 
2009). Genes regulating different functions, such as the neurotransmitter GABA, 
and the rate of metabolism of alcohol, may be linked to different forms of alco¬ 
hol dependence. Also, the neurotransmitter dopamine is linked to reward and 
alcohol craving, and genetic factors affecting dopamine’s actions may be impor¬ 
tant. People who carried a specific form of a gene regulating dopamine were 
only found to develop alcohol dependence if they were also exposed to a risky 
environment, such as being raised in an abusive or neglectful family or being 
active in a college fraternity or sorority, while people without the form of the 
gene did not develop alcohol dependence even if exposed to those risky environ¬ 
ments (Park, Sher, Torodov, & Heath, 2011). 

Relatives of people with alcohol dependence were found to have found higher 
rates of drug abuse, antisocial personality disorder, anxiety disorder, and depres¬ 
sion (Nurnberger et al., 2004). One study examined the effects of being raised 
with a parent with alcohol dependence among biological and adoptive children 
and found that genetic but not environmental factors played a role in transmit¬ 
ting drinking (King et al., 2009). The inheritance of problem drinking may be 
due to a genetically determined behavioral disinhibition that includes delinquent 



Chapter 11 Alcohol Dependence 167 


behavior, a deviant peer group, antisocial attitudes, aggression, and impulsiv- 
ity. Luczak, Wall, Cook, Shea, and Carr (2004) argued that the different rates of 
alcohol dependence found in different ethnic groups, such as European Americans 
and Chinese Americans, are due to the protective presence of a specific gene 
found much more often in Chinese Americans. However, the protective effect of 
this gene is also significantly affected by environmental factors, such as the social 
acceptability of drinking (Luczak, Glatt, & Wall, 2006). Michael did not have a 
clear family history of problem drinking. Neither his parents nor his brother drank 
heavily, but he had an uncle who always seemed to be drunk at family parties. 

Other evidence suggests that prenatal exposure to alcohol is an additional 
risk factor for drinking in young adulthood, separate from the contribution of 
family history of alcohol use (Baer, Sampson, Barr, Connor, & Streissguth, 
2003). The chance of a 21-year-old offspring reporting alcohol dependence was 
tripled by maternal heavy drinking during that pregnancy. 

Personality traits may affect a person’s risk for alcohol dependence. Alcohol 
use has been linked to negative moods such as sadness and hostility (Hussong, 
Hicks, Levy, & Curran, 2001). Researchers have found that people with high 
levels of negative emotions, such as sadness, anger, and anxiety, are more likely 
to later develop a drinking problem (Elkins, King, McCue, & Iacono, 2006). 
They also found that people who had high levels of constraint, which includes 
having traditional values, avoiding thrill-seeking, and acting cautiously and in 
a restrained manner, were significantly less likely to later develop a drinking 
problem. Although Michael did not have low levels of constraint, he did report 
high levels of negative emotions, consistent with an increased risk for alcohol 
dependence predicted by this research. Alcohol has been shown to significantly 
reduce people’s stress response (Sher, Bartholow, Peuser, Erickson, & Wood, 
2007). It may do this in two ways. The first is by directly muting anxiety, which 
could occur either because of alcohol’s actions on the body or by alcohol’s stim¬ 
ulation of the reward pathways in the brain, resulting in positive reinforcement 
that competes with anxiety. The second is by altering people’s ability to pay 
attention to stressful stimuli. Alcohol use might therefore be reinforcing, either 
by reducing negative emotions or by enhancing positive ones. Heavy alcohol 
use may be a way to regulate mood and may reflect a failure of other means of 
coping with emotional states. Research in which people recorded their moods 
and drinking on a daily basis has shown that nervousness predicted increased 
use of alcohol (Swendsen et al., 2000). And people seeking treatment for alcohol 
dependence who have difficulty managing a variety of negative emotions, such 
as anger, depression, boredom, and loneliness, were found to be more likely to 
drink during treatment and to experience relapse (Berking et al., 2011). This 
tension-reduction model fits the clinical information on Michael. He initially 
related urges to drink to reduce his anxiety in social situations and began heavy 
drinking when faced with major disappointments in life. 

Alcohol’s effects on mood depend on the situation in which it is con¬ 
sumed. Alcohol impairs effortful cognitive processing and narrows attention to 



168 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


immediately available cues, called alcohol myopia (nearsightedness); intoxi¬ 
cated people have less cognitive processing capacity for both ongoing activity 
and worry (Moss & Albery, 2009). If a distracting activity is available, intoxi¬ 
cated people focus on it instead of worrying about their stress. But alcohol can 
increase negative moods if there are no distractors; in this case, intoxicated 
people focus their limited cognitive capacity only on the unpleasant source of 
worry and feel even worse. What a person expects the effects of drinking alco¬ 
hol to be also plays a role. The tension-reducing effects of alcohol may only 
be found among some people. The relationship between alcohol use and 
negative moods has been found to be stronger among males, people who lack 
alternative ways of coping with stress, and those who expect alcohol to allevi¬ 
ate their negative moods (Kushner, Abrams, & Borchardt, 2000). Similarly, 
the relationship is stronger among people with less intimate and supportive 
social relationships (Hussong et al., 2001). 

One other way people may become alcohol dependent is by consuming 
alcohol more frequently and in greater amounts. A large population was stud¬ 
ied over a period of 26 years, and it was found that men who drank more than 
21 drinks per week, or who drank on a daily basis, had an increased risk of 
later developing alcohol dependence, whereas the risk was increased for women 
by drinking at all. The more a woman drank, even from one to seven drinks 
per week, the more she increased her risk for later becoming alcohol dependent 
(Flensborg-Madsen, Knop, Mortensen, Beeker, & Grpnbaek, 2007). At least within 
that generation, alcohol exposure at even relatively modest doses involved 
greater risk for women. These findings may seem obvious but may also provide 
a warning to social groups that encourage a lot of drinking. 

Treatment 

Many people with drinking problems do not believe they have a problem and, 
therefore, are unwilling to enter treatment. Only one in seven people with an 
alcohol-related disorder ever receive any treatment (Cohen, Feinn, Arias, & 
Kranzler, 2007). When people resist treatment, as Michael did, initial treatment 
efforts are focused on convincing them to change their drinking. This is what Dr. 
Lawton tried to accomplish by having Grace describe the negative consequences 
of Michael’s drinking and later listing these negative consequences during treat¬ 
ment. Providing Michael with feedback about how far his drinking departed 
from national norms was also part of this process (as recommended by Sobell & 
Sobell, 1976). 

After the person agrees to treatment, many options are available. Hospitals 
provide detoxification, supervised withdrawal from alcohol, and a variety of 
group and individual therapies. Benzodiazepines are used to manage alco¬ 
hol withdrawal (Myrick & Anton, 2004). However, hospital treatment does not 
appear to be superior to outpatient therapy, except for people with few sources 
of social support and other psychological problems (Finney & Moos, 1998). 



Chapter 11 Alcohol Dependence 169 


Two medications, disulfiram and naltrexone, are used to prevent relapse (Myrick 
& Anton, 2004). Disulfiram interacts with alcohol to produce unpleasant side 
effects, so the person feels sick if they drink. However, patients often will not 
take the disulfiram as prescribed to avoid this effect. Naltrexone may reduce 
cravings but is only modestly effective in preventing relapse. Researchers are 
experimenting with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), a non- 
invasive treatment that is effective in treating depression, to control cravings. 
One study comparing rTMS to a placebo sham treatment found that it resulted 
in moderate reductions in craving (Mishra, Nizamie, Das, & Praharaj, 2009). 
Psychopharmacological treatment of anxiety and depression in people with alco¬ 
hol dependence is also important to consider because it improves the success of 
treating the drinking (Mann, 2004). However, treatment of depression alone does 
not improve the person’s drinking (Nunes & Levin, 2004). Relapse after treat¬ 
ment is the most common outcome, so helping people predict and manage their 
vulnerability to relapses is critically important (Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2007). 
Although people who never receive treatment sometimes recover on their own, 
those who do receive treatment do significantly better (Cohen et al., 2007). 

The most common type of treatment is AA (Cohen et al., 2007). In its 
regular meetings, new members announce that they are alcoholics, and older 
members relate stories about their problem drinking and how their lives have 
improved since giving up alcohol. The group provides emotional support, under¬ 
standing, and a social life to relieve isolation. There is a religious emphasis; one 
of the 12 steps is “Make a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the 
care of God.” Members are encouraged to call on one another for companion¬ 
ship or encouragement not to relapse. AA views alcoholism as a disease that can 
never be cured. Complete abstinence is necessary because it is believed that a 
single drink can trigger a complete relapse. Evidence shows that AA is an effec¬ 
tive treatment (Gossop et al., 2003; Kahler et al., 2004). In addition, it is free of 
charge and widely available, even on the weekends and evenings (Kelly, Magill, 
& Stout, 2009). In a longitudinal study of men, Vaillant (2003) found that AA 
attendance predicted sustained abstinence. 

After his treatment with Dr. Lawton, Michael was encouraged to join a local 
group that had many features of AA but without the religious components or the 
emphasis on abstinence. Many similar groups (such as Rational Recovery) now 
exist throughout the country. Outpatient group therapy is also effective in reduc¬ 
ing drinking. Litt, Kadden, Cooney, and Kabela (2003) found that cognitive- 
behavioral group therapy and interactional group therapy, which focuses on the 
patient’s relationship patterns, produced significant gains even 18 months later. 
Both of these treatments were more effective than AA. 

The treatment Michael received drew on the work of the Sobells (1976), 
who initiated moderate drinking as a treatment goal and demonstrated the effec¬ 
tiveness of such an approach. Patients are taught to respond adaptively to situa¬ 
tions in which they might otherwise drink excessively. Social skills, relaxation, 
and assertiveness training (especially regarding how to refuse a drink) can be 



170 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


part of the treatment. Other strategies include increasing exercise, reducing the 
presence of cues for drinking (e.g., taking a new route home that does not go by 
a bar), sipping rather than gulping drinks, and imposing a delay between drinks. 
Relapse prevention, pioneered by Marlatt (1985), is also a component. As was 
done with Michael, a distinction is drawn between a lapse and a relapse. Patients 
are taught that a lapse does not signal a total relapse. A lapse should be regarded 
as a learning experience, not as a sign that the battle has been lost. There has 
often been strong disagreement between those who advocate abstinence-only 
focused treatment, the mainstream view of treatment providers, and those who 
also consider controlled or moderate drinking as a legitimate goal. Complete 
abstinence as the only accepted goal may alienate some prospective patients and 
may be difficult for others to achieve, resulting in them being viewed as treat¬ 
ment failures, even if they have reduced the amount of alcohol they consume 
(Gastfriend, Garbutt, Pettinati, & Forman, 2007). Reduction in quantity of alco¬ 
hol consumed reduces the risk of negative health and social outcomes, such as 
suicide and domestic violence. Although abstinence from alcohol is the best out¬ 
come, it may not always be possible for a given client. 

This case did not have a happy ending. Michael’s fatal heart attack was 
probably related to his high blood pressure, which was worsened by his chronic 
alcohol abuse. Stress also plays a role in raising blood pressure, and Michael 
certainly experienced a lot of it, related both to his job and his marriage. 


Discussion Questions 


1. What do you think about therapists advocating controlled or moderate drink¬ 
ing instead of abstinence? Do you think Michael might have been more suc¬ 
cessful in stopping his drinking if Dr. Lawton encouraged him to be abstinent? 

2. What are some of the social or cultural groups that encourage excessive alco¬ 
hol consumption? What are the risks of doing this? What groups discourage 
alcohol consumption? 

3. What are the health and social risks and costs of alcohol dependence? What 
do you think about how our society handles this problem? Is there more we 
should be doing, or is society too involved in this issue? 

4 . What does it mean to say that alcoholism is a complex disorder with multiple 
causes that interact with each other? What are examples of ways this could 
occur? 




CHAPTER 12 


Sexual Dysfunction: Female 
Orgasmic Disorder and 
Premature Ejaculation 


Barbara Garrison was concerned about a number of problems when she arrived 
for her first appointment at the mental-health center. Her principal complaint 
was an inability to achieve orgasm during sexual intercourse with her husband, 
Frank. They were both 33 years old and had been married for 15 years. Frank 
was a police detective, and Barbara had recently resumed her college education. 
Their children, a daughter and a son, were 15 and 12, respectively. 

Barbara’s orgasmic problem was situational in nature. She had experi¬ 
enced orgasms through masturbation, and she masturbated an average of once 
or twice a week; however, she had never reached orgasm during sexual activ¬ 
ity with Frank. The problem did not involve sexual desire or arousal. She found 
Frank sexually attractive, wanted to enjoy a more satisfying sexual relationship 
with him, and did become aroused during their sexual encounters. They had 
intercourse two or three times each month, usually late at night after the chil¬ 
dren had gone to sleep and always at Frank’s initiative. Their foreplay was pri¬ 
marily limited to genital manipulation and seldom lasted more than 5 minutes. 
Frank always reached orgasm within a minute or two after penetration and often 
fell asleep shortly thereafter, leaving Barbara in a frustrating state of unful¬ 
filled sexual arousal. On many occasions, she resolved this dilemma by slipping 
quietly out of the bedroom to the TV room, where she would secretly mastur¬ 
bate to orgasm. Frank realized that Barbara did not experience orgasms dur¬ 
ing intercourse but chose not to discuss the problem. He did not know that she 
masturbated. 

This situation was distressing to Barbara. She felt considerable guilt over 
her frequent masturbation, particularly after sexual intercourse, because she 
believed that masturbation was a deviant practice. She was also concerned about 
the sexual fantasies she had during masturbation. She often imagined herself in a 


171 



172 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


luxurious hotel room having sexual intercourse with a sequence of 8 or 10 men. 
They were usually men she did not know, but she would sometimes include men to 
whom she had been attracted, such as classmates from the university and friends 
of her husband. Barbara believed that these promiscuous fantasies proved that 
she was a latent nymphomaniac. She feared that she could easily lose control 
of her own desires and worried that she might someday get on a train, leave her 
family, and become a prostitute in a large city. 

Her anxiety regarding sexual interests and arousal was also a problem dur¬ 
ing intercourse with Frank. He had, in fact, made numerous efforts to find out 
what she found arousing, but she remained uncommunicative. She was afraid 
to tell him what she liked because she thought that he would then realize that 
she was “oversexed.” She was self-conscious during sexual activity with Frank. 
She worried about what he would think of her and whether she was perform¬ 
ing adequately. Questions were continually running through her mind, such as 
“Am I paying attention to the right sensations?” or, “Will it happen this time?” 
The combination of fear of loss of control of her sexual impulses and continual 
worry about her inadequacy as a sexual partner finally persuaded Barbara to seek 
professional help. 

In addition to Barbara’s inability to reach orgasm during intercourse, 
Barbara and Frank were not getting along as well as they had in the past. Several 
factors were contributing to the increased strain in their relationship. One 
involved Barbara’s decision to resume her education. Frank had not completed 
his college education, and the possibility that Barbara might finish her degree 
was threatening to him. He was also uncomfortable around the friends Barbara 
had met at the university. His job as a detective seemed to increase this tension 
because relations between students and the police had been strained by campus 
arrests for use of drugs and alcohol. Frank believed that Barbara’s younger class¬ 
mates saw him as an unwelcome authority figure who could present a threat to 
their independence. He resented changes in the way she dressed and also attrib¬ 
uted their increasingly frequent disagreements to the influence of the university 
environment. 

They also had more financial concerns than in previous years. Barbara’s 
tuition and other fees amounted to a considerable amount of money each semester, 
and within 3 years, their daughter would be old enough to go to college. They had 
also taken out a substantial loan to build an addition onto their home. To make 
more money, Frank had been working many more overtime hours. Considering 
that he was away from home so often, Barbara resented the fact that he spent most 
of his spare time working on the new rooms in their house. 

Despite their frequent arguments and differences of opinion, Barbara and 
Frank were both seriously committed to their marriage. Neither of them was 
particularly happy, but they were not considering a divorce. Barbara believed 
that their relationship would be markedly improved if she could overcome her 
orgasmic dysfunction. Frank was less concerned about that particular issue but 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 173 


agreed that Barbara might feel better if a therapist could “help her understand 
her problem.” 


Social History 


Barbara’s parents were both in their middle forties when she was born. They had 
one other child, a boy, who was 5 years older than Barbara. Her father was a 
police officer, and her mother was a homemaker. Barbara’s parents clearly cared 
for each other and for the children, but they were not openly affectionate. She 
could not remember seeing them embrace or kiss each other except for occa¬ 
sional pecks on the cheek or top of the head; nor, on the other hand, could she 
remember hearing them argue. It was a quiet, peaceful household in which emo¬ 
tional displays of any kind were generally discouraged. 

Barbara's parents and her older brother were unusually protective of her. 
She was “the baby of the family” and was always closely supervised. It seemed 
to Barbara that she was not allowed to do many of the things that her friends’ 
parents permitted. When she was young, she was not allowed to leave their yard. 
When she was older and in high school, she was not allowed to go out on school 
nights and had to be home by 10 p.m. on weekends. Her parents insisted on 
meeting all of her friends and, in some cases, forbade her to associate with cer¬ 
tain other children. Until she was 16 years old, Barbara was not allowed to go to 
parties if boys were also invited. 

She remembered her first date as an awkward experience that occurred 
during her junior year in high school. A boy whom she had admired for sev¬ 
eral months had finally asked her to go to a movie. Her parents agreed to allow 
her to go after her father asked several of his friends about the boy and his par¬ 
ents. When he picked her up before the movie, Barbara’s parents asked so many 
questions that they were finally late for the show. Later, as they were leaving the 
theater, Barbara realized that her brother and his girlfriend, who both attended 
a local junior college, had been sitting several rows behind them. Their parents 
had called him and asked if he would keep an eye on her “to be sure everything 
was okay.” He did not intend to be secretive and, in fact, asked Barbara if she 
and her friend would like to go out for hamburgers and Cokes after the show. 
This carefully arranged supervision did not ruin the experience. Everyone had 
a good time, and Barbara went out with this same boy several times in the next 
year. Nevertheless, the protective manner in which Barbara’s family treated her 
prevented her from developing close relationships with boys her own age and 
later left her feeling uncomfortable when she was alone with men. 

Barbara’s knowledge about and experiences with sexual activity were 
extremely limited during childhood and adolescence. Neither of her parents 
made an effort to provide her with information about her own body or repro¬ 
ductive functions. Her mother did discuss general issues such as romance and 




174 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


marriage with Barbara, but only at the most abstract level. All of the books and 
magazines in their home were carefully screened to avoid exposing the children 
to suggestive literature or photographs. Barbara was not able to learn much about 
these matters from her friends because she was so closely supervised. After she 
began menstruating at the age of 11, her mother gave her a book that explained 
the basic organs and physiology associated with the human reproductive system 
and, once again, avoided any personal discussion of Barbara’s concerns about 
sexuality. The implicit message conveyed by her parents’ behavior and attitudes 
was that sex was a mysterious, shameful, and potentially dangerous phenomenon. 

After she graduated from high school, Barbara began taking classes at the 
local junior college. She continued to live at home with her parents and main¬ 
tained several of the same friends she had had in high school. During her first 
semester, Barbara met Frank, who was then a student at the police academy. 
After several weeks, they began to see each other regularly. Her parents liked 
Frank, perhaps because her father was also a policeman, and they gradually 
began to allow her greater freedom than they had when she dated in high school. 
Frank and Barbara were both 18 years old, but he was much more mature and 
experienced. He had been dating regularly since he was 15 and had had sexual 
intercourse for the first time when he was 17. 

Their sexual relationship progressed rapidly. Although she was initially 
apprehensive and shy, Barbara found that she enjoyed heavy petting. She 
refused to have intercourse with Frank for several months; finally she gave in 
one evening after they had both been drinking at a party. She later remembered 
being disappointed by the experience. Frank had climaxed almost immedi¬ 
ately after penetration, but she had not reached orgasm. Her guilt was replaced 
by utter shock when she realized several weeks later that she was pregnant. They 
did not discuss the pregnancy with her parents and agreed they should be mar¬ 
ried as soon as possible. Their daughter was born less than 6 months after their 
marriage. Despite the obvious “prematurity” of the birth, Barbara’s parents never 
mentioned the issue of premarital intercourse or pregnancy. Barbara dropped out 
of college and did not return to school for many years. 

Barbara and Frank’s sexual relationship did not change much over the next 
few years, although their frequency of intercourse declined markedly during 
their second year of marriage. Intercourse continued to be a pleasurable experi¬ 
ence for both of them, even though Barbara was not able to experience orgasm. 
Her first orgasm occurred after they had been married for more than three years 
and both of their children had been born. Following their typical pattern, Frank 
had fallen asleep after intercourse and Barbara was lying in bed, half awake and 
very much aroused. She was lying on her stomach, and some of the blankets 
happened to be bunched up under her pelvis and between her legs. Without rec¬ 
ognizing what she was doing, Barbara began rocking rhythmically from side to 
side. She was relaxed and noticed that this motion created a pleasurable sen¬ 
sation. Several minutes after she began rocking, she experienced an intense, 
unmistakable orgasm. It was an extremely pleasurable phenomenon restrained 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 175 


only by her fear of waking Frank. After her accidental discovery of masturba¬ 
tion, Barbara experimented further with various styles of self-manipulation and 
was soon masturbating regularly. She was afraid to describe these experiences 
to Frank, however, because she believed that masturbation was an immoral and 
selfish act, and her ability to reach orgasm by self-stimulation did not generalize 
to intercourse with Frank. Barbara also avoided conversations about sex when 
she was talking to other women. She believed that masturbation and sexual fan¬ 
tasies were immoral, and she was convinced that none of her friends had ever 
had such experiences. 

Conceptualization and Treatment 


In approaching the sexual problem described by Barbara, the therapist focused 
on Barbara and Frank as a couple, not on Barbara as an individual. She was 
principally concerned with the things Barbara and Frank did and said when they 
were together. It was clear from Barbara’s description of the problem that she 
knew very little about sexual behavior. Her reports also indicated that she and 
Frank were not communicating effectively during sexual activity and were not 
engaging in effective sexual behaviors. To focus on the relationship, the therapist 
asked Barbara to bring Frank with her to the second treatment session. 

Frank was initially reluctant to join Barbara in treatment because he had 
always believed that the problem was primarily hers. Nevertheless, he agreed to 
talk to the therapist at least once, and, during this interview, he indicated that 
he was also dissatisfied with their sexual relationship. On further questioning, he 
even admitted that he had secretly worried that he was to blame for Barbara’s 
orgasmic difficulty. This thought had caused him considerable anxiety from time 
to time, particularly when he was also worried about his performance in other 
roles such as work and his relationship with the children. 

The therapist asked Frank to describe their sexual activity from his perspec¬ 
tive and noted, as Barbara had previously indicated, that little emphasis was 
placed on foreplay. Two considerations seemed to be particularly important in 
this regard. First, Frank said that he did not know what sorts of activity might be 
more pleasurable for Barbara because she had never expressed any feelings in 
this regard. Second, Frank indicated that he generally felt unsure of his own abil¬ 
ity to delay ejaculation and therefore preferred to insert his penis in Barbara’s 
vagina before he “lost control.” This concern was related to his belief that inter¬ 
course was the most mature form of sexual activity and his fear that Barbara 
would begin to question his virility if he were unable to accomplish intercourse. 
Although he realized that Barbara was not entirely happy with their sexual rela¬ 
tionship, Frank privately conceded that he would rather not draw attention to his 
own difficulty. The therapist responded in a reassuring manner, emphasizing that 
she did not want to ascribe responsibility to either partner. The primary concern 
of treatment, she said, would be to increase both partners’ satisfaction with their 




176 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


sexual relationship. She also noted that most forms of sexual dysfunction, partic¬ 
ularly premature ejaculation, are amenable to brief, behavioral forms of therapy. 
Given this explanation of the problem and considering the optimistic prognosis, 
Frank agreed to work together with Barbara toward a solution to their problems. 

During her initial interviews with both Barbara and Frank, the therapist 
made an effort to consider various factors that might contribute to sexual dys¬ 
function, such as depression, fatigue, and marital distress. None of these seemed 
to account for the problem. Both partners were somewhat unhappy, but neither 
was clinically depressed. Although their relationship had been strained by the 
sexual problem, they were both committed to the marriage. Neither was involved 
in an extramarital relationship, which might detract from their involvement in 
treatment or their interest in change, and both Barbara and Frank expressed 
affection for each other. It was interesting to note that they were more willing to 
express their positive feelings for the other person when they were talking with 
the therapist than when they were interacting directly. Overall, the sexual dys¬ 
function did not seem to be secondary to other adjustment problems. 

Before beginning a psychological approach to their sexual problem, Barbara 
and Frank were also asked to obtain complete physical examinations. This assess¬ 
ment was recommended in an effort to rule out the possibility that their difficulty 
could be traced to a physical disorder. Various diseases that affect the central 
nervous system, hormone levels, and vascular functions can influence sexual 
arousal and performance. Abnormalities in the musculature and tissue structure of 
the genital area can also be problematic. None of these factors was evident in this 
particular case. 

During the third session, the therapist explored many of Barbara’s and 
Frank’s attitudes and beliefs about sexual behavior. Her purpose was to improve 
their communication with each other about sexual matters and to open a discus¬ 
sion in which they could acquire additional knowledge and correct mistaken 
beliefs. Several issues were particularly important and seemed to be related to 
their failure to engage in more satisfying sexual behavior. For example, both 
Barbara and Frank believed that vaginal stimulation should be the principal 
source of sexual pleasure for women and that orgasm during coitus is depend¬ 
ent solely on such stimulation. The therapist explained that the clitoris is, in fact, 
more sensitive than the vagina. Female orgasm depends on both direct and indi¬ 
rect stimulation of the clitoris during both masturbation and intercourse. 

Considerable time was also spent discussing the Garrisons’ attitudes toward 
and use of sexual fantasies. The topic was broached cautiously by the thera¬ 
pist. She commented in a matter-of-fact tone that most normal adults engage in 
sexual fantasies; she then asked Frank to describe one of his favorite fantasies. 
Despite some initial embarrassment, and much to Barbara’s surprise, Frank told 
Barbara and the therapist that he often pictured himself working late at night 
and being seduced in the detectives’ lounge by an attractive female colleague. 
This was the first time that Barbara and Frank had discussed sexual fantasies. 
While Barbara expressed some mild jealousy that Frank would think about 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 177 


another woman, she was relieved to learn that he also used sexual fantasies. 
His self-disclosure lowered her anxiety on the topic. She then shared a descrip¬ 
tion of one of her own fantasies—admittedly one that was less provocative than 
her thoughts of having intercourse with several men in a row. Having explored 
these and other issues at length, the therapist recommended a few books that 
the Garrisons should read to learn more about human sexuality. One of the 
books was Because It Feels Good: A Woman’s Guide to Sexual Pleasure and 
Satisfaction (Herbenick, 2009). It was hoped that this information would reduce 
their anxiety about their own interests and practices and, at the same time, sug¬ 
gest new activities that they had not yet tried. 

The next step in treatment was to eliminate some of the obstacles that were 
interfering with Barbara’s ability to become totally aroused and to teach her and 
Frank to engage in more enjoyable sexual behavior. This could be accomplished 
only in a totally nondemanding atmosphere. Because of their history of sexual 
difficulty and dissatisfaction, Barbara and Frank had become self-conscious 
about their sexual behavior. Barbara felt considerable pressure, which was mostly 
self-imposed, to reach orgasm; Frank was secretly concerned about whether he 
could delay ejaculation long enough for Barbara to become more aroused. From 
the point at which Frank initiated sexual activity, both of them tended to assume 
a detached perspective as they observed what they were doing and how they 
were feeling. The therapist attempted to eliminate pressure to perform by tell¬ 
ing Barbara and Frank that they were not to attempt sexual intercourse under any 
circumstances during the next few weeks. She told them that she was going to 
ask them to practice an exercise known as sensate focus in which their only goal 
would be to practice giving and receiving pleasurable sensations. 

Sensate focus is a touching exercise in which the partners simply take 
turns gently massaging each other’s body. The therapist instructed them to 
begin by finding a quiet time when they would not be disturbed or distracted 
and they were not overtired. Having removed their clothes, Barbara was to lie 
on her stomach across the bed while Frank massaged her back and legs. She was 
encouraged to abandon herself to whatever pleasures she experienced. Barbara’s 
instructions were to concentrate on the simplest sensations—warm and cold, 
smooth and rough, hard and soft—and to let Frank know what she enjoyed and 
what she wanted to change. Stimulation of Barbara’s breasts and genital area was 
expressly prohibited to avoid demand for increased sexual arousal. They were 
asked to practice sensate focus at least four times before their next session. 

Barbara and Frank both responded positively to this initial exercise. They 
described these extended periods of touching and caressing as relaxing and 
pleasurable; they both said that they had felt a sense of warmth and closeness 
that had disappeared from their relationship years ago. Barbara also expressed 
relief that she was able to focus on the pleasure of Frank’s touch without wor¬ 
rying about whether she would have an orgasm or whether he would ejaculate 
quickly and leave her stranded in a state of unfulfilled arousal. With this posi¬ 
tive beginning, the therapist suggested that they move on to the next step. They 



178 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


were to change positions for the next week. Frank would sit on the bed with his 
back against the headboard and his legs spread apart. Barbara would sit in front 
of him, facing in the same direction, with her back resting against his chest and 
her legs resting over his. In this position, Frank would be able to touch and mas¬ 
sage the front of her body; the restrictions against touching her breasts and geni¬ 
tals were removed. He was told, however, to avoid direct stimulation of the clitoris 
because it can be irritating and in some cases painful. Barbara was instructed to 
rest her hand gently on his and to guide his touch to convey the sensations that 
were most pleasurable to her, including location, pressure, and rhythm of move¬ 
ment. The therapist emphasized that Barbara was to control the interaction. As 
before, they were asked to practice at least four times in the following week. 

At the beginning of the next session, minor problems were noted in the 
progress of treatment. Barbara reported that she had become somewhat self- 
conscious with the new exercise. She found the experience pleasant and arous¬ 
ing, but her mind wandered and she was unable to achieve a state of total 
abandon. Frank had also encountered difficulty with ejaculatory control. On the 
third evening of practice, he had become totally absorbed in the process and, 
without completely realizing what he was doing, he had rubbed his erect penis 
against Barbara’s back and reached orgasm. The therapist reassured Frank that 
this experience was not unexpected and could, in fact, be seen as the predictable 
outcome of his immersion in the sensate focus exercise. It was also clear, how¬ 
ever, that additional changes should be made in the process to help Frank gain 
more control and to reduce Barbara’s tendency toward detachment. 

The therapist addressed the issue of ejaculatory control by recommending 
that Barbara and Frank practice the “start-stop” procedure. Frank was instructed 
to lie on his back so that Barbara could stimulate his erect penis manually. 
His task would be to concentrate on his own level of arousal and signal Barbara 
when he experienced the sensation that immediately precedes ejaculation. At this 
point, Barbara would discontinue stimulation. When Frank no longer felt that 
ejaculation was imminent, she would resume stimulation until he again signaled 
that he was experiencing the urge to ejaculate. They were asked to repeat this 
cycle four or five times initially and to work toward achieving 15 to 20 minutes 
of continuous repetitions. 

The sensate focus exercise was also continued with additional instruction. 
Barbara was encouraged to engage in her favorite sexual fantasies while guiding 
Frank’s hands over her body. Frank’s acceptance and support were particularly 
helpful in this regard because of Barbara’s guilt about the use of sexual fantasies. 
By concentrating on these images, she would be able to avoid other mental distrac¬ 
tions that had impaired her ability to become completely involved in the exercise. 

The next 2 weeks of practice were very successful. Frank was able to control 
his ejaculatory urges within 4 or 5 days; Barbara found that the start-stop exercise 
was also quite pleasurable for her. In the past, Frank had always discouraged her 
from stroking or playing with his erect penis because he was afraid that he would 
ejaculate prematurely. It was becoming clear that their improved communication 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 179 

about what they enjoyed and when to start and stop various activities resulted 
in considerably greater freedom and pleasure than their previously constricted 
interactions had allowed. Barbara was now able to reach orgasm through Frank’s 
manual stimulation of her breasts and clitoris. She was much less inhibited about 
directing his touch, and he noted he had learned a lot about Barbara’s erotic 
zones. Much of the tension and inhibition had been reduced. 

The final step was to help Barbara experience orgasm during intercourse. The 
prohibition against intercourse was lifted, and a new procedure was introduced. 
As before, they were instructed to begin their exercises by alternating in sensate 
focus. When they were both moderately aroused, Frank would lie on his back and 
Barbara would sit on top of him with her knees drawn toward his chest and insert 
his penis into her vagina. She would then control the speed and rhythm of their 
movements. Emphasis was placed on moving slowly and concentrating on the 
pleasurable sensations associated with vaginal containment. If Frank experienced 
the urge to ejaculate, Barbara was instructed to withdraw his penis until the sensa¬ 
tion had passed. If she became less aroused during intercourse, they would also 
separate, and Frank would once again employ clitoral stimulation until Barbara 
reached a stage of more intense arousal, at which point they would resume coitus. 

Barbara and Frank practiced this procedure many times over the next 
few weeks. It was an extremely pleasurable experience, and they noticed 
that they had made considerable progress, most notably Frank’s ability to 
delay ejaculation throughout 20 to 30 minutes of intercourse with Barbara 
in the superior position. Nevertheless, Barbara was not able to reach orgasm 
through penile stimulation alone. They continued to alternate periods of 
insertion with manual stimulation of the clitoris, but Barbara’s orgasms were 
limited to the latter intervals. The therapist noted that this was not uncom¬ 
mon and encouraged them to begin experimenting with other positions for 
intercourse that would also allow manual stimulation of her clitoris during 
coitus. The Garrisons were perfectly satisfied with this solution. 

Fifteen weeks after their initial visit, Barbara and Frank had made signifi¬ 
cant changes in their sexual adjustment. Both of them were pleased with these 
developments, which included Frank's confidence in his ability to control ejac¬ 
ulation and Barbara's ability to reach orgasm during intercourse. Perhaps most 
important, these changes were not specifically limited to their sexual inter¬ 
actions. They reported that they also talked more frequently and openly about 
other areas of their lives and felt closer to each other than they had at the begin¬ 
ning of treatment. Thus, the new lines of communication that had been devel¬ 
oped in sexual activities did generalize, or transfer, to other situations. 


Discussion 


Sexual dysfunctions are defined by interference with any phase of the sexual- 
response cycle. This cycle may be thought of as a continuous sequence of events 




180 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


or sensations, beginning with sexual excitement and ending with the decrease in 
tension following orgasm. This cycle can be roughly divided into three phases that 
are characteristic of both men and women. During the excitement phase, the per¬ 
son begins to respond to sexual stimulation with increased flow of blood to the 
genital area. This engorgement leads to erection in the male and vaginal lubrica¬ 
tion in the female. Various physiological changes, including more rapid breathing 
and an increase in heart rate and blood pressure, occur throughout the excitement 
phase. These changes reach their maximum intensity during the orgasmic phase, 
a brief period of involuntary response. In males, the orgasmic phase occurs in two 
stages, beginning with the collection of sperm and seminal fluid in the urethra 
(creating a sensation of inevitability, or "point of no return”) and ending with 
ejaculation. In females, the orgasmic phase involves rhythmic contractions in the 
outer third of the vagina. From a subjective point of view, the orgasmic phase is 
the point of peak physical pleasure. It is followed by a rapid dissipation of ten¬ 
sion. The period following orgasm, known as the resolution phase, encompasses 
the return of bodily functions to a normal resting state (LeVay & Valente, 2003). 

Interference with sexual response may occur at any point and may take the 
form of subjective distress (such as the fear of losing ejaculatory control) or dis¬ 
rupted performance (such as the inability to maintain an erection sufficient for 
intercourse).The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM- 
IV-TR-, APA, 2000, pp. 535-558) provides the following definitions of problems 
experienced by men and women: 

Hypoactive sexual desire disorder: Persistently or recurrently deficient (or 
absent) sexual fantasies and desire for sexual activity. 

Sexual aversion disorder: Persistent or recurrent extreme aversion to, and avoid¬ 
ance of, all (or almost all) genital sexual contact with a sexual partner. 

Female sexual arousal disorder: Persistent or recurrent inability to attain, or to 
maintain until completion of the sexual activity, an adequate lubrication-swelling 
response of sexual excitement. 

Male erectile disorder: Persistent or recurrent inability to attain or maintain, 
until completion of the sexual activity, an adequate erection. 

Female orgasmic disorder (inhibited female orgasm): Persistent or recurrent 
delay in, or absence of, orgasm following a normal sexual excitement phase. 
Male orgasmic disorder: Persistent or recurrent delay in, or absence of, orgasm 
following a normal sexual excitement phase during sexual activity. 

Premature ejaculation: Persistent or recurrent ejaculation with minimal sexual 
stimulation before, on, or shortly after penetration and before the person wishes it. 
Dyspareunia: Recurrent or persistent genital pain in either a male or a female 
before, during, or after sexual intercourse. 

Vaginismus: Recurrent or persistent involuntary spasm of the musculature of the 
outer third of the vagina that interferes with sexual intercourse. 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 181 


All these problems may be general or situational in nature. In the case of 
male erectile disorder, for example, the person may never have been able to 
attain or maintain an erection until completion of the sex act. On the other hand, 
he may have been able to do so in the past, or with a different partner, but cannot 
do so presently. 

Most people with hypoactive sexual desire retain the capacity for physical 
sexual response, but they are generally unwilling to participate and are unrecep- 
tive to their partner’s attempts to initiate sexual relations. Lack of interest in sex¬ 
ual activity may be an important source of distress, particularly for the spouse 
or partner of such an individual, but it is also a difficult problem to define. What 
is a normal sexual appetite? Instead of establishing an arbitrary standard, DSM- 
IV-TR (APA, 2000) has opted for a flexible judgment in this area that depends 
on a consideration of factors that affect sexual desire such as age, sex, health, 
intensity and frequency of sexual desire, and the context of the individual’s life. 

Diagnostic judgments in the area of sexual dysfunction often depend on sub¬ 
tle considerations. Is the problem sufficiently persistent and pervasive to warrant 
treatment? And, if it is, does the problem center on one partner or the other? These 
may be difficult questions. In the Garrisons’ case, for example, it was not clear 
whether Barbara’s inability to reach orgasm during intercourse could be attrib¬ 
uted to Frank’s difficulty in delaying or controlling his ejaculatory response. On 
the other hand, if she had been able to reach orgasm quickly, he might not have 
worried about the question of control. Two conclusions can be drawn from these 
considerations. First, sexual dysfunction is most easily defined in the context of a 
particular interpersonal relationship. The couple, not either individual, is the focus 
for assessment and treatment. Second, the identification of sexual dysfunction rests 
largely with the couple’s subjective satisfaction with their sexual relationship and 
not with absolute judgments about typical, or normal, levels of performance. 

Various forms of sexual dysfunction are common (Christensen et al., 2011). 
The best information on the epidemiology of sexual dysfunction comes from the 
National Health and Social Life Survey (NHSLS) (Laumann, Gagnon, Michael, 
& Michaels, 1994). These investigators used probability sampling to select peo¬ 
ple for their study. They interviewed nearly 3,500 men and women between the 
ages of 18 and 59 throughout the United States. Each person was asked whether, 
during the past 12 months, he or she had experienced “a period of several 
months or more when you lacked interest in having sex; had trouble achieving 
or maintaining an erection or (for women) had trouble lubricating; were unable 
to come to a climax; came to a climax too quickly; or experienced physical pain 
during intercourse.” For men, the most frequent form of sexual dysfunction was 
premature ejaculation, affecting 29% of the men in the study. Arousal problems 
were reported by 10% of the men overall (and 20% of those over the age of 50). 
For women, the most frequently reported difficulties were low sexual desire 
(33%), lack of orgasm (24%), and arousal problems (19%). Fourteen percent of 
the women (and 3% of the men) indicated that they had recently experienced a 
period of several months during which intercourse was painful. 



182 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


The NHSLS data regarding the prevalence of sexual dysfunction should 
be interpreted with caution because they are not based on diagnostic judgments 
made by experienced clinicians. Participants’ responses may overestimate the 
prevalence of sexual dysfunction. Consider, for example, the frequency of female 
orgasmic disorder. One fact is relatively clear: Approximately 10% of adult 
women report a total lack of previous orgasmic response (Clayton, 2007). Does 
this failure to experience orgasm automatically indicate a dysfunction or the 
absence of the capacity to reach orgasm? Some women voluntarily refrain from 
sexual activity. Others may not have engaged in activities, such as masturbation, 
that are likely to result in orgasmic response. The DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) defi¬ 
nition of female orgasmic disorder stipulates that the delay or absence of orgasm 
must follow a normal sexual excitement phase. The diagnosis is to be made only 
if the clinician decides that the woman’s orgasmic capacity is “less than would be 
reasonable for her age, sexual experience, and the adequacy of sexual stimulation 
she receives” ( DSM-IV-TR , APA, 2000, p. 547). Based on this more restrictive 
definition, fewer women would meet the criteria for this disorder. 

Another important diagnostic consideration involves the issue of personal 
distress. Is the person upset about diminished sexual responsiveness? The 
NHSLS investigators asked people whether they had experienced a period of 
time in which they had lost interest in sexual behavior or had trouble becom¬ 
ing aroused or reaching orgasm. The DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) definition consid¬ 
ers whether the person experienced subjective distress or interpersonal difficulty 
as a result of the lack of sexual response. Recommendations regarding fur¬ 
ther refinements in the classification of female sexual dysfunction have placed 
increased emphasis on personal distress as a necessary feature in the definition 
(Both, Laan, & Schultz, 2010). 

Etiological Considerations 

Some cases of sexual dysfunction may be the result of other forms of physical 
or mental disturbance. Human sexual response involves a complicated and deli¬ 
cate system that may be disrupted by many factors. Several physical conditions 
and medical disorders, including diseases of the central nervous system, head and 
spinal cord injuries, drug ingestion, and fatigue, can impair the person’s inter¬ 
est in sexual activity or the ability to perform sexual responses (Burns, Rivas, 
& Ditunno, 2001). Other psychological adjustment problems can also lead to 
disturbances in sexual activity. Depression, for example, is commonly asso¬ 
ciated with a drastic decline in a person’s interest in sex. People who are tak¬ 
ing antidepressant medication, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), may also experience sexual dysfunctions as a side effect (Clayton & 
West, 2003). These factors should be considered before a psychological treat¬ 
ment approach is attempted. 

Many different psychological explanations have been proposed to account 
for the development and maintenance of sexual dysfunction (McConaghy, 2005). 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 183 


Psychoanalytic theory traces sexual problems to an inadequate resolution of the 
Oedipal conflict. In Barbara’s case, for example, a psychoanalyst might have 
argued that her inability to reach orgasm during intercourse was associated with 
fear of success in the sense that being successful in her adult sexual relation¬ 
ship might be analogous to succeeding in the Oedipal situation. According to 
this notion, Barbara wanted to have intercourse with her father and was thus in 
competition with her mother. But she was also afraid that if she succeeded, her 
mother would punish her severely. To the extent that her husband was symbolic 
of her father and reaching orgasm during intercourse with him was equivalent 
to “winning” the struggle with her mother, Barbara’s orgasmic inhibition could 
be determined by this unconscious mental conflict. The treatment approach that 
follows from this theoretical position would involve long-term, individual psy¬ 
chotherapy with Barbara in which the goal would be to help her achieve insight 
into her frustrated sexual desire for her father, her consequent fear of her mother, 
and the relationship between this conflict and her current relationship with her 
husband. 

Certain aspects of this theory are consistent with the present case. Most 
notable might be the resemblance between her father and her husband, Frank. 
They were both police officers and shared various interpersonal characteristics, 
such as conservative social and political beliefs. Barbara’s current relation¬ 
ship with her mother might also be raised as evidence in support of a psycho¬ 
analytic approach to the case. Her father had died shortly after Barbara and 
Frank were married. Barbara and her mother continued to see each other often. 
Barbara admitted privately that her mother was usually more of an annoyance 
than a help, meddling in their daily activities and criticizing the manner in which 
Barbara and Frank handled the children. Barbara was markedly unassertive with 
her mother and usually acquiesced to her demands. A psychoanalyst might have 
argued that this close, ongoing interaction exacerbated and maintained Barbara’s 
rivalry with her mother. 

Learning theorists have also stressed the importance of past events in deter¬ 
mining present sexual adjustment, but they have emphasized the importance of 
conditioning procedures, not unconscious mental conflict and sexual desire for 
one’s parents. From a behavioral perspective, many forms of sexual dysfunction 
can be seen as the product of learned inhibitions that are acquired as a result of 
unsuccessful, early sexual experiences. In some cases, these may have been trau¬ 
matic events such as being raped or molested (Leonard & Follette, 2002). 

Behavioral models of sexual dysfunction emphasize the importance of 
learned, anticipatory anxiety that is associated with sexual stimulation and the 
development of avoidance responses that serve to reduce this anxiety. This 
aspect of the model is weak; there is little scientific evidence indicating that 
either classical or operant conditioning plays an important role in learning sex¬ 
ual responses (Letoumeau & O’Donohue, 1997). On the other hand, behavioral 
models also stress the importance of social skills, in this case knowing how to 
engage in effective sexual behaviors. They focus on what the people do during 



184 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


sexual activity instead of on the symbolic meaning of the act. This aspect of the 
behavioral approach has had important implications for the development of psy¬ 
chological treatments for sexual dysfunctions. 

Several elements of Barbara’s case are compatible with a social skills 
approach to sexual dysfunction. Her parents’ inability to display physical affec¬ 
tion (at least in front of the children), their failure to provide her with any infor¬ 
mation about sexual behavior, and the implicit message that sexual activity was 
somehow shameful or disgusting, were all important factors that contributed to 
both her anxiety regarding sexual activity and her lack of appropriate hetero¬ 
sexual social skills. Prior to her relationship with Frank, Barbara had no sex¬ 
ual experience other than brief kisses and hugs after dates. She and Frank, at 
his insistence, progressed rapidly in their own sexual relationship without giv¬ 
ing Barbara sufficient time to extinguish gradually her fear of physical intimacy. 
Furthermore, their first experience with intercourse was generally unpleasant. 
This unfortunate event, coupled with their subsequent realization that Barbara 
had become pregnant, added to her discomfort in sexual activity. Instead of 
addressing the problem directly and learning more enjoyable ways of interacting 
sexually, Barbara and Frank tried to ignore the problem. They had intercourse 
infrequently and shortened the occasions when they did have sex to the briefest 
possible intervals. 

Response patterns that provoke and exacerbate sexual problems tend to 
fall into four general categories. The first is failure to engage in effective sexual 
behavior. This category includes practices such as rushing to the point of pen¬ 
etration before the woman is sufficiently aroused, as was the Garrisons’ habit. 
This sort of error is almost always the result of ignorance about human sexual 
responses and not the product of deeply ingrained neuroses or personality disor¬ 
ders. Frank and Barbara did not know that most women take longer than men to 
reach an advanced stage of sexual arousal, and, as a result, neither of them had 
made a serious effort to improve or prolong their activity during foreplay. 

The second type of maladaptive response is sexual anxiety, which includes 
subjective factors such as the pressure to perform adequately and fear of fail¬ 
ure. This type of interference was clearly present in the Garrisons’ case. Frank 
had been concerned for a number of years about losing control of his ejaculatory 
response. Because of this fear, he continued to rush through the initial stages 
of sexual activity and resisted any subtle efforts that Barbara made to slow 
things down. She, on the other hand, was troubled by a double-edged concern. 
Although she always tried very hard to have an orgasm (and was, in fact, self- 
conscious about her failure to reach a climax), she was simultaneously worried 
about getting carried away. Barbara was convinced that if she really abandoned 
herself completely and followed her “raw sexual instinct,” she would lose con¬ 
trol of herself. In so doing, she feared that she would risk losing Frank com¬ 
pletely because he would be repulsed by her behavior. This was truly a vicious 
dilemma. If she did not relax and let herself go, she would not have an orgasm, 
thus perpetuating her own unhappiness as well as Frank’s conviction (as she 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 185 


imagined it) that she was an inadequate lover. On the other hand, if she did relax 
and let herself go, she would lose control and run the risk of alienating him 
completely. 

The third set of factors that maintain sexual dysfunctions include percep¬ 
tual and intellectual defenses against erotic feelings. Sexual responses are not 
under voluntary control. The surest way to lose an erection, for example, is to 
think about the erection instead of the erotic stimuli. Nevertheless, some people 
engage in a kind of obsessive self-observation during sexual activity and, as a 
result, become spectators, not participants, in their own lovemaking. Laboratory 
studies have provided further insight regarding this phenomenon, and they have 
suggested a few interesting distinctions between sexually functional and dys¬ 
functional people (Wiegel, Wincze, & Barlow, 2002). The arousal levels of sexu¬ 
ally functional subjects are typically enhanced by performance-related erotic 
cues, such as the presence of a highly aroused partner. The same kind of stimula¬ 
tion can distract people who are sexually dysfunctional. The cognitive interfer¬ 
ence that they experience in response to these stimuli leads to a decrease in their 
sexual arousal. This problem was particularly characteristic of Barbara’s behav¬ 
ior. She often found herself ruminating during sexual activity and asking herself 
questions about her own performance and desires (Will I come this time? What 
would happen if Frank knew what 1 have been thinking about?). 

Failure to communicate is the final category of immediate causes of sexual 
dysfunction. Women suffering from orgasmic disorder report that, in addi¬ 
tion to holding negative attitudes toward masturbation and feeling guilty about 
sex, they are uncomfortable talking to their partner about sexual activities, 
especially those involving direct clitoral stimulation (Kelly, Strassberg, & 
Turner, 2004). The Garrisons’ failure in this regard was painfully obvious. Both 
were unwilling to talk to the other person about their desires and pleasures. In 
Barbara’s case, her inhibitions could be traced to the environment in which she 
was raised. Her parents explicitly conveyed the message that decent people did 
not talk about sex. If she could not talk to her own mother about basic matters 
such as menstruation and pregnancy, how could she expect to discuss erotic fan¬ 
tasies with her husband? Consequently, Barbara and Frank knew little about the 
kinds of stimulation and fantasies that were most pleasing to their partner. 

Treatment 

The widely publicized work of Masters and Johnson (1970) had an important 
impact on the development and use of direct psychological approaches to the 
treatment of sexual dysfunction. Although questions have been raised about 
the way in which they evaluated and reported the results of their treatment pro¬ 
gram, their apparent success created an optimistic and enthusiastic environment 
in which further research and training could be accomplished. Instead of treat¬ 
ing the problem as a symbol of unconscious turmoil, sex therapists are primarily 
concerned with the problem itself and the current, situational determinants that 



186 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


serve to maintain it. This is clearly a cognitive-behavioral approach. Therapists 
seek to eliminate sexual anxiety by temporarily removing distracting expecta¬ 
tions (intercourse is typically forbidden during the first several days of treat¬ 
ment) and substituting competing responses. The sensate focus exercise, for 
example, is employed to create an erotic atmosphere, devoid of performance 
demands, in which couples can learn to communicate more freely. In later ses¬ 
sions, couples are instructed in the use of specific exercises designed to foster 
skills related to their specific sexual problem (Bach, Wincze, & Barlow, 2001; 
McCarthy, 2004). 

The start-stop procedure for treating premature ejaculation is a good exam¬ 
ple of this approach. The male partner is taught to attend to important sensa¬ 
tions that signal the imminence of ejaculation and to interrupt further stimulation 
until the urge passes. Frank’s experience indicates that important cognitive 
changes accompany the physiological and behavioral components of this tech¬ 
nique. As he became more successful in controlling his ejaculatory responses, 
Frank experienced less apprehension during extended periods of foreplay. His 
increased confidence and willingness to communicate were, in turn, important 
assets in addressing Barbara’s orgasmic difficulty. Considerable success has 
been achieved with this approach (Grenier & Byers, 1995). 

Antidepressant medication provides another useful approach to the treatment 
of premature ejaculation. Double-blind, placebo-controlled studies have shown 
that SSRIs, such as paroxetine (Paxil), can lead to a significant delay in ejacula¬ 
tion after 3 or 4 weeks of treatment (Waldinger, Zwinderman, & Olivier, 2001). 

The prognosis for orgasmic dysfunction in women is also quite good 
(McCabe, 2001). For example, one study reported a 95% rate of success for 
directed masturbation training with 150 women who had never had an orgasm 
prior to treatment (LoPiccolo & Stock, 1986). Approximately 85% of the 
women were also able to reach orgasm if they were stimulated directly by their 
partners. It is also important to note, however, that only 40% of these women 
were able to reach orgasm during intercourse. With few exceptions, all women 
can learn to experience orgasm, but a substantial percentage cannot reach climax 
through the stimulation afforded by intercourse alone. As in Barbara’s case, many 
women require additional stimulation beyond that associated with the motion of 
the erect penis in the vagina. These women should not be considered treatment 
failures. Orgasm during intercourse does not have to be the ultimate measure of 
treatment success (Stock, 1993). 

Research studies have tended to focus on certain aspects of sexual perform¬ 
ance, such as the ability to delay ejaculation and orgasmic responsiveness. It 
must be remembered, however, that performance variables represent only one 
aspect of sexual adjustment. Factors such as subjective arousal, personal sat¬ 
isfaction, and feelings of intimacy and closeness with one’s partner are also 
important considerations. Barbara and Frank were happy with their sexual rela¬ 
tionship despite the fact that she could not achieve orgasm through intercourse 
alone. They had made remarkable changes in their ability to communicate and 



Chapter 12 Sexual Dysfunction: Female Orgasmic Disorder and Premature Ejaculation 187 


share sexual pleasure and were content to use positions that allowed either Frank 
or Barbara to stimulate Barbara’s clitoral area manually while they were having 
intercourse. With this limitation in mind, direct approaches to orgasmic dysfunc¬ 
tion have been successful (Heiman, 2002). 


Discussion Questions 


1. Barbara and Frank were both experiencing difficulties with their sexual rela¬ 
tionship. She could be assigned a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder. But 
was the problem hers? Or was it his or theirs? Could sexual dysfunction be 
treated in an individual who came to therapy without a partner? 

2. What impact does culture have on the development and maintenance of sex¬ 
ual dysfunctions? Do you think the popular media have a positive or negative 
impact on attitudes regarding sexual behavior? 

3. Did Barbara’s parents play an influential role in the development of her sex¬ 
ual problems? Many children grow up in similar homes without experiencing 
orgasmic difficulties as adults. Why did Barbara develop a problem while 
other people do not? 

4 . Viagra is now one of the most widely promoted and prescribed forms of med¬ 
ication in our society. If a female version of Viagra had been available when 
Barbara was being treated, do you think it would have solved her problem? 




CHAPTER 13 


Paraphilias: Exhibitionism 
and Frotteurism 


Pete began court-ordered therapy in November with a clinical psychologist. 
During the initial interview, Pete, a 34-year-old married man, explained that he 
was coming for therapy concerning a sexual problem that he had had for years. 
He was seeking treatment now because he had been arrested in September for 
a sexual assault. He had been driving home, taking a shortcut along some back 
roads, when he saw a car with its hood up and a woman looking at the engine. 
He stopped to offer assistance. The woman had pulled over because her alterna¬ 
tor light had come on, and Pete was able to correct the problem by adjusting the 
fan belt. When the woman thanked him, he pulled her close to him, trying to 
fondle her buttocks. As she pushed him away, he exposed himself and started 
masturbating. The woman ran to her car and drove off. Pete made no attempt to 
follow. Later that night the police came to his home and arrested him. An initial 
hearing was held the next day, and bail was set. Pete’s wife attended the hearing 
and paid the bail. At his subsequent trial, Pete was allowed to plead guilty to a 
reduced charge of attempted assault and was put on probation for 2 years. Part of 
the probation agreement was that he seek treatment. 

This was not the first time that Pete’s sexual behaviors got him into trouble. 
He had a long history of sexual deviance since early adolescence. His deviant 
sexual practices took two forms. One was going into crowded places—shopping 
centers or subway trains—moving up close behind a woman, and rubbing his 
pelvis against her buttocks. This type of activity is called frottage ; the disorder 
is called frotteurism. Pete’s other deviant sexual practice was exhibitionism. 
Sometimes he would park his car in a place where many women were walking, 
remain seated behind the wheel, and masturbate as he watched them. He did not 
expose himself directly but hoped that the passing women would look into his 
car and see him. Other times he would masturbate under a raincoat in a place 
frequented by women. Teenagers with “cute little behinds’’ were his preferred 
target for both activities. 


188 



Chapter 13 Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 189 


Pete had engaged in frottage and exhibitionism since adolescence. The first 
time he clearly remembered doing either was as a 16-year-old high school stu¬ 
dent. He was at a football game on a drizzly Saturday afternoon and had on a 
raincoat, one in which the pockets allow a hand to go from the outside all the 
way through the coat to the body. Sitting next to a female acquaintance, he found 
himself sexually aroused and masturbated to orgasm, his actions apparently 
undetected by anyone. 

When he got his driver’s license later that year, he began to openly mas¬ 
turbate in his car. Since then, he had engaged in either frottage or exhibition¬ 
ism fairly regularly—an average of 15 to 20 times per year. Pete reported that 
the urge to do so usually increased when he was under stress, such as during 
exams in high school and college or while under work pressures in adulthood. 
His sexual behavior had worried him for some time. He had been in therapy for 
brief periods on three previous occasions. Each time he dropped out after several 
sessions because it seemed to him that little progress was being made. This time 
Pete could not drop out of therapy because doing so would violate the terms of 
his probation. 

Other important facets of his problem were explored over several sessions, 
including his sexual fantasies, which were a mirror of his deviant sexual prac¬ 
tices. During the day, he often imagined rubbing against or masturbating in 
front of young women. His masturbatory fantasies also had the same content. 
He reported that the frequency of his sexual fantasies had been increasing lately. 
But there was an important difference between his fantasies and his actual sex¬ 
ual experiences. In real life, he had never succeeded in arousing a woman by 
rubbing against her or publicly masturbating. Women he rubbed against moved 
away from him or, less frequently, threatened to call for help if he persisted. 
When women saw him masturbating in his car, their reaction was shock or dis¬ 
gust. In his fantasies, however, Pete’s frottage or masturbation usually served as 
a prelude to intercourse. The young women of his dreams became aroused as he 
rubbed against them or when they saw his erect penis. His fantasy would then 
expand to include a more conventional sexual encounter. Fantasies limited only 
to vaginal intercourse, however, were not stimulating to Pete. 

Pete also had problems in other areas of his life. Although he was a college 
graduate, he had never been able to find a job that he found satisfying. His inter¬ 
ests in painting and music had never been profitable. He had held a long series of 
jobs he regarded as dull. His longest period of employment in the same job was 
18 months. He was currently working as a bartender in a topless bar, which 
was not a good choice for someone with paraphilias. 

Pete and Helen married when he was 24 and she was 22 after dating for 
6 months. They had a 5-year-old son. Helen was a high school graduate and 
worked as an executive secretary for the vice president of an engineering firm. 
She had held this relatively high-paying and responsible job for 4 years. Pete 
reported that their marriage had gradually gone downhill. They did not fight or 
argue much, but he felt that Helen had become less affectionate, less interested 



190 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


in sex, and did not seem to care as much for him as she once had. Currently, he 
said, she found excuses to avoid most of his sexual advances. The frequency of 
intercourse had dropped to less than once per month. He reported that he did 
enjoy sex with his wife. Foreplay usually involved rubbing his penis on her bare 
buttocks, and intercourse was in the rear entry position. As with his fantasies, 
however, frottage was a necessary prelude to arousal and subsequent intercourse. 
According to Pete, the birth of their son seemed to coincide with the beginning 
of Helen’s decline in interest in him. Pete was initially uninvolved and refused to 
help with feedings and diaper changes. More recently, he was beginning to feel 
and act more like a father. 


Social History 


The origins of Pete’s current problems seemed to lie in his childhood. He 
reported he had been “emotionally deprived” as a child. His father never held 
jobs for very long; consequently, the family moved a great deal. For this rea¬ 
son, Pete felt that he never had a chance to develop close childhood friendships. 
Furthermore, he felt rejected by his father. He reported that they never played 
or went on outings together and that his father always seemed cold and distant. 
Pete’s father died when he was 12 years old. 

Pete felt that his relationship with his mother was warm, but he thought 
that she was overprotective and somewhat smothering. After the death of Pete’s 
father, his mother never dated and seemed to invest all her emotional needs in 
her children, especially Pete. She crossed appropriate boundaries that regulate 
interactions between family members in ways that were sexually abusive. For 
example, she continued to bathe him until he was 15 years old. During these 
baths in Pete’s early adolescence, she took great care in cleaning his penis, 
stroking it with the wet bar of soap and seeming to enjoy the erections that were 
often produced. 

When Pete was 13 years old, he and his family were living in an apartment 
complex. His principal playmates were three slightly older female teenagers. 
The four often engaged in rough-and-tumble play like wrestling. During one of 
these play sessions, Pete had his first orgasm. He was wrestling with one of the 
girls and was on top of her, his genitals against her buttocks. While moving, he 
became erect and continued thrusting until he climaxed. He was able to keep his 
orgasm secret from his friends and went home quickly to clean up. 

After this initial pleasurable experience, Pete began sexually abusing his 
8-year-old sister. At night whenever he had the opportunity, he would go to her 
bed, take off her pajama bottoms, and mb his penis against her bare buttocks until 
he reached orgasm. He continued this practice regularly for the next couple years 
and stopped only after his sister threatened to tell their mother. When he stopped 
the frottage with his sister, he tinned to regular masturbation with fantasies of both 
rubbing and sexual intercourse during his self-stimulation. When he was 15 years 




Chapter 13 Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 191 


old, he had his first consensual sexual experience. Pete had heard stories for some 
time about the sexual activities of a 17-year-old girl who lived in the same apart¬ 
ment building as he did. He went out of his way to get to know her, did errands and 
favors for her, and finally was invited to have sex with her one night in a nearby 
park. Although he became aroused as they kissed and petted, he lost his erection 
when he attempted intercourse. Thereafter, Pete reported that he became afraid to 
approach women. His first instance of public masturbation occurred the next year. 

On a social level, adolescence was not much better for Pete than childhood 
had been. He did hang around with a group, but he did not develop any really 
close relationships. He did not date much and reported that being around popular 
and attractive women made him anxious. He also indicated that it was difficult 
for him to participate in conversations. He felt that most often people talked only 
about trivialities and that he was just not interested in that. 

After graduating from high school, Pete attended a local community college 
and then a university and graduated with a bachelor’s degree in psychology. He 
then drifted through a series of jobs and casual affairs until meeting his wife. 
She was the first woman with whom he had ever had a lasting relationship. 

Another perspective on Pete, and particularly on his marriage, was gained 
through a marital assessment conducted in separate sessions with Pete and 
Helen. Pete’s main complaints about Helen centered on her lack of affection 
and their poor sexual relationship. He also reported that they argued about how 
to spend their leisure time. Helen liked to socialize with friends, but Pete found 
most of them boring. Helen did not know about Pete’s long history of sexual 
problems. She thought that Pete’s trouble with the law was the only time he 
had ever engaged in such activity and could not understand why he had done 
it. She was extremely upset and repulsed by the entire incident but stood by 
him. However, she made it clear that another such incident would end their 
marriage. 

Helen’s description of the problems in their marriage was similar to Pete’s. 
She recognized that infrequent sex, absence of affection, and disagreements about 
socializing with friends were serious problems. She had tolerated Pete’s frottage 
before intercourse but did not find it appealing. Helen also complained about Pete 
as a father and husband. She resented the fact that he was less than a full partner 
in the marriage, sharing only minimally in parenting and other household duties. 
Her resentment was increased because she worked all day and then had to come 
home to cook, clean, and take care of their son while Pete did little but watch 
television. Even when Pete was not working, which was frequently, he made 
little attempt to help out. She had lost respect for him because of his failure to 
share in the marriage and because of his job history and consequent inability 
to make much of a financial contribution. She was currently somewhat ashamed 
of Pete’s job as a bartender in a topless bar and suspected that he might be 
having an affair. Indeed, she attributed most of her inability to be affectionate and 
her declining interest in sex to this loss of respect. She added that she wished Pete 
would not always follow the same routine in their sexual encounters. 



192 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


Initially, Pete’s therapist needed to implement some procedures to increase the 
likelihood that Pete would be able to stop both the public masturbation and 
the frottage and thus avoid being jailed. He had not engaged in either for almost 
2 months, the longest period for which he had refrained since adolescence. But 
Pete reported that the urges were still there and that they would appear unex¬ 
pectedly. Because the frottage and public masturbation were linked to particular 
situations—parking lots, shopping centers, and subways—Pete was told to avoid 
these situations as much as possible. In addition, Pete was taught how to handle 
an urge if it arose. Because his urges were linked to heightened arousal, he was 
instructed about how to relax himself by imagining that he was on a beach, feel¬ 
ing drowsy, and enjoying the warm sun. In this and subsequent therapy sessions, 
Pete practiced imagining typical situations that would generally elicit the urge to 
exhibit or engage in frottage, but instead of acting on his urges, he relaxed and 
imagined that he overcame the urge. 

Over subsequent sessions, several other components were added to the ther¬ 
apy. First, an attempt was made to try to change Pete’s sexual fantasies, both 
when masturbating and when he felt attracted to or aroused by any woman. 
Second, marital therapy seemed necessary, both for the marriage itself and, more 
specifically, for the sexual relationship between Pete and Helen. Both aspects of 
the therapy were directed toward increasing the frequency and attractiveness 
of intercourse. 

The first step in trying to make consensual intercourse more attractive 
to Pete was to have him masturbate while fantasizing only about intercourse. 
Initially, Pete reported that he was unable to develop a full erection unless he 
imagined frottage or public masturbation. He was first instructed to arouse 
himself with any fantasy (for him this was most often frottage or public mas¬ 
turbation), to begin masturbating, and, when he was close to orgasm, to switch 
to an intercourse scene. He was able to do this easily. After a week of practice, 
he was told to switch to the intercourse fantasy closer to the start of masturba¬ 
tion. He was able to do so with no loss of arousal. By the fourth week, he was 
able to initiate and complete masturbation with no fantasies of frottage or public 
masturbation. 

As this part of the therapy was progressing, Pete also began to work on 
altering fantasies elicited by women. His usual response to seeing a young 
woman, particularly one in tight jeans or slacks, was to begin imagining rubbing 
against her buttocks. A treatment was devised to help Pete change these fanta¬ 
sies. Initially during a therapy session, Pete was shown a series of pictures of 
young women in tight jeans. For each stimulus he was asked to generate a non- 
sexual fantasy, such as trying to guess the woman’s occupation. He was encour¬ 
aged to focus on the woman’s face instead of her buttocks as he thought about 
the picture. Over a series of trials in which Pete verbalized his thoughts, a rep¬ 
ertoire of distracting thoughts and fantasies were developed, with the therapist 




Chapter 13 Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 193 


guiding Pete and providing feedback. This repertoire would help him have non- 
sexual thoughts when he encountered an attractive woman. Over the next several 
weeks, Pete continued to practice his new fantasies, both in session and at home. 
As this skill became better established, Pete was also encouraged to use it in his 
day-to-day life. He soon reported that he was beginning to have fewer and fewer 
thoughts of frottage when he encountered attractive young women. 

Pete’s fantasies regarding women responding positively to his sexual 
advances were also addressed. Although he had never succeeded in arousing a 
woman by exhibiting or rubbing, in his fantasy life, he had continually imag¬ 
ined that his advances led to sexual contact. The therapist pointed out the strik¬ 
ing inconsistency between his fantasies and real life. With this point beginning 
to sink in, Pete was also encouraged to reflect on how these incidents actually 
affected his victims. Pete was guided to have a more empathic sense of the 
upsetting emotions his advances actually created. 

Marital therapy was then initiated. At first, the focus was on the nonsexual 
problems in the marriage. With the therapist functioning as a mediator and facili¬ 
tator, the couple was instructed to talk about the various difficulties they were 
experiencing. The first problem they discussed was Pete’s failure to help out 
with household chores. He acknowledged that he had not helped out very much 
but added also that when he did try to do something, Helen usually found fault 
with his efforts. 

Helen agreed in part with Pete’s analysis. For example, when Pete did 
the laundry, he would leave the clothes in the dryer, and they became wrin¬ 
kled and would need ironing. From Helen’s perspective, she was therefore not 
really saved from any work; if she had done the laundry herself, she would have 
quickly folded the clothes and not had to iron them. From Pete’s viewpoint, his 
efforts had gone unappreciated. With the therapist’s guidance, Helen and Pete 
were able to realize the aspects of the situation that were creating the problem. 
Neither was feeling good about what the other had done. To solve the problem, 
Pete agreed to do the laundry and fold it immediately, and Helen agreed to be 
sure to let Pete know that she appreciated his efforts. A similar system was insti¬ 
tuted for several other household chores (cooking, vacuuming, general cleaning) 
in which Pete had previously tried to be helpful, but his efforts had not elicited 
Helen’s approval. 

Next, the therapist directed the couple to consider Pete’s belief that Helen 
was not affectionate toward him. But the therapist was not able to limit the dis¬ 
cussion to this problem; Helen was soon talking about her general lack of respect 
for Pete. The session became highly emotional. Pete, understandably somewhat 
defensive, argued that he had always done the best he could to be a provider 
for the family. This issue was not even close to resolution by the end of the ses¬ 
sion; the therapist instructed Pete and Helen not to talk about it further over the 
coming week but to think about it and be ready to discuss it the next week. 

Two days later, Pete called the therapist to request an extra session. Pete 
was visibly tense when they met the next day. He said that he had really been 



194 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


shaken by the last session, that he had no idea that Helen had come to view him 
so negatively. This realization, he said, had a profound effect on him, and he felt 
compelled to let the therapist know something that he had previously not told 
anyone. Over the past several years, he had engaged in a series of casual sexual 
experiences with young women, principally dancers at the bar. During most of 
them, he had not been able to complete intercourse satisfactorily. The pattern 
was similar to his initial attempt at intercourse. He would first become aroused 
and fully erect but later would lose his erection. He said that he wanted to start 
over now, to stop the affairs and do more to please Helen. 

At the next session with Pete and Helen, Pete quickly announced that he 
had decided to change jobs, was job hunting, and had several promising leads. 
Seeing that Pete was serious about improving the marriage, Helen was obviously 
delighted. She also reported that he was helping out more around the house. She 
was beginning to believe that he was serious about improving their marriage, 
and she felt good about expressing her appreciation toward him. The next week, 
Pete landed a job as a camera salesperson in a department store. Helen was very 
pleased. The two of them stated that they were ready to deal with sex. 

Before beginning this phase of therapy, the therapist met individually with 
Pete to check on his progress in dealing with the urge to masturbate publicly or 
engage in frottage. Pete had continued to masturbate successfully to fantasies of 
consensual intercourse. Furthermore, he reported that seeing an attractive young 
woman no longer led automatically to thoughts of frottage and that he had not 
really experienced any of his old urges. 

From this point on, the therapy progressed quickly. Because Helen was 
beginning to feel better about Pete, she said that she would not resist his sexual 
advances. They discussed with the therapist their sexual likes and dislikes and 
agreed to plan several sexual experiences over the next week. Pete was told to 
refrain from his usual foreplay (rubbing his penis against Helen’s buttocks). The 
couple agreed on manual and oral stimulation to take its place. They had inter¬ 
course four times the next week. Over the next few sessions, the couple contin¬ 
ued working on their marital problems. Progress was excellent. They reported 
that their sexual interactions were both frequent and pleasurable. Occasional ses¬ 
sions with Pete alone revealed that he no longer felt the urge to masturbate pub¬ 
licly or engage in frottage. 


Discussion 


Pete’s problems fall within the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR\ APA, 2000) category of paraphilias —frequently 
occurring sexual urges, fantasies, or behaviors that involve unusual objects and 
activities. The diagnosis is made only if the person is distressed by the urges or 
behavior or if social or occupational functioning is impaired. DSM-IV-TR lists 
nine paraphilias, as follows: 




Chapter 13 Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 195 


Fetishism: The repeated use of nonliving objects to produce sexual excitement. 
Transvestic fetishism: Recurrent cross-dressing to produce sexual arousal. 
Pedophilia: Sexual activity with prepubescent children. 

Voyeurism: Repetitive looking at unsuspecting people, either while they are 
undressing or engaging in sexual activity. 

Sexual masochism: The production of sexual arousal by being made to suffer. 
Sexual sadism: The production of sexual arousal by inflicting physical or psycho¬ 
logical suffering on someone else. 

Paraphilia not otherwise specified: A heterogeneous group of unconventional 
activities (e.g., coprophilia—obtaining sexual gratification from handling feces; 
and necrophilia—being sexually intimate with a corpse). 


The remaining two paraphilias, exhibitionism and frotteurism, were Pete’s 
specific problems. In exhibitionism, the person repeatedly exposes his genitals to 
a stranger for the purpose of achieving sexual excitement. Frotteurism involves 
intense sexual urges and sexually arousing fantasies involving touching and rub¬ 
bing against a nonconsenting person. It is the touching, not the coercive nature 
of the act, that is sexually exciting. Little is known about frotteurism, although 
clinical reports indicate that it does not often occur in isolation and commonly 
appears in conjunction with other paraphilias such as exhibitionism (Krueger & 
Kaplan, 1997). Often victims are unaware of what has happened and typically 
do not report incidents even if they are; prosecuting acts of frotteurism is dif¬ 
ficult because perpetrators usually deny their criminal act (Guterman, Martin, & 
Rudes, 2011). In addition to his frotteurism and exhibitionism, Pete also had an 
incestuous relationship with his sister, in which he repeatedly sexually abused 
her. Incest is sexual relations between close family members and is listed in the 
DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) as a form of pedophilia. As with Pete, incest is most 
common between brother and sister. 

Like the other paraphilias, exhibitionism is practiced almost exclusively 
by men. It is the most common sexual offense for which people are arrested, 
accounting for about one-third of all such arrests. Exhibitionism can involve 
either the exposure of a flaccid or an erect penis, accompanied by masturbation, 
as in Pete’s case. The motivation for exhibiting seems to vary as the disorder 
progresses. When it begins in adolescence, it is sexually exciting, but in adult¬ 
hood, exhibiting is accompanied by general arousal rather than by sexual excite¬ 
ment (McConaghy, 1994). At the time of the act, the adult exhibitionist typically 
feels both cognitive and physiological signs of arousal—nervousness, palpita¬ 
tions, perspiring, and trembling. Many report that the urge becomes so powerful 
that they lose control and even some awareness of what they are doing. The most 
common triggers to the urge to expose themselves that men with exhibitionism 
reported were boredom and stress (Grant, 2005). Most wanted the target of their 
exposure to notice and respond with interest and excitement, whereas only a few 



196 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


reported that they wanted to elicit shock or disgust in their target. Exhibitionists 
prefer to exhibit to people they do not know (Freund & Watson, 1990). 

Although clinical lore suggests that exhibitionists typically do not seek 
further sexual contact with their victims, research evidence indicates that, 
like Pete, some do get arrested for crimes involving actual sexual contact. For 
example, Sugarman, Dumughn, Saad, Hinder, and Bluglass (1994) followed a 
large sample of exhibitionists and found that 26% subsequently were convicted 
for sexual crimes, including rape. Others have found about half of exhibition¬ 
ists that were caught reoffended over the 5 years following their initial arrests, 
and a significant number of them go on to commit violent sexual offenses 
(Rabinowitz-Greenberg, Firestone, Bradford, & Greenberg, 2002). Some report 
that exhibitionism often co-occurs with frotteurism (Tan & Zhong, 2001). 

People with paraphilias often have other psychological disorders. Kafka 
and Hennen (2002) evaluated 88 men who voluntarily sought outpatient treat¬ 
ment for paraphilias and found that 17% reported a childhood history of physi¬ 
cal abuse, and 18% reported a history of childhood sexual abuse; 61% had been 
arrested (not always related to the paraphilia); and 25% had been hospitalized 
for psychiatric problems. Exhibitionism was the most common paraphilia in the 
sample, followed by pedophilia and voyeurism. Many had a history of other psy¬ 
chiatric diagnoses, especially mood disorders: 69% met criteria for dysthymic 
disorder, 39% for major depression, and 7% for bipolar disorder; 42% had sub¬ 
stance abuse, 42% had attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 39% had an anxi¬ 
ety disorder, and 22% had a conduct disorder. Others have also found that people 
with a paraphilia were very likely to also have a substance-abuse disorder, a 
mood disorder, or an antisocial personality disorder (Dunsieth et al., 2004). 

There may be differences, though, between people with paraphilia who seek 
treatment voluntarily and those who do not seek treatment but are identified 
because they are arrested. The rates of comorbid psychological disorders among 
30 men with a paraphilia arrested for hands-on sexual offenses (pedophilia and 
sexual sadism) were examined by Feue, Borchard, and Hoyer (2004). Seventy- 
three percent met criteria at some point in their lives for an anxiety disorder, 
57% for a substance-abuse disorder, 30% for a mood disorder, and 74% for a 
personality disorder (most commonly antisocial personality disorder or avoid¬ 
ant personality disorder). Men with exhibitionism who go on to be arrested for 
committing additional sexual offenses were more likely to report problems with 
drinking (Firestone, Kingston, Wekler, & Bradford, 2006). 

In their review of paraphilias, Saleh and Berlin (2003) noted that the 
disorder typically emerges in adolescence and, once established, is usually sta¬ 
ble and long-lasting. Men with exhibitionism typically expose themselves fairly 
frequently, at least once a month, and for many, weekly (Grant, 2005). Most 
people with paraphilias do not voluntarily seek treatment but are court man¬ 
dated to attend or receive treatment while incarcerated. Often people with para¬ 
philias do not freely admit to the extent of their deviant sexual behavior. Up to 
90% of adult sex offenders commit their first sex offense in early adolescence 



Chapter 13 Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 197 


(Shi & Nicol, 2007). When questioned during polygraph (lie detector) testing, 
sexual offenders admitted to greater numbers of episodes of paraphilic behavior 
and significantly earlier ages of onset than was known from probation records 
(Wilcox & Sosnowski, 2005). They admitted to twice as many episodes of exhi¬ 
bitionism and public masturbation. Moreover, none of the probation records 
contained references to frottage, but half of the men admitted under polygraph 
examination that they had committed frottage. This suggests that the frequency 
and scope of deviant sexual behavior of sexual offenders is much larger than 
might be suspected. In addition, the men admitted that they began their sexual 
offending an average of 14 years before they were arrested for it. According to 
data from court referrals, exhibitionism usually begins in adolescence, continues 
into the twenties, and declines thereafter. Whether the frequency truly declines 
or whether older exhibitionists are arrested less frequently is unknown. 

Etiological Considerations 

Biological theories of the origin of the paraphilias suggest that the behavior origi¬ 
nates in problems in the stmcture or functioning of the brain or endocrine system. 
Perhaps abnormalities in some area of the brain could lead to paraphilia. About 
8% of men who experience a traumatic brain injury show some sort of sexually 
aberrant behavior after the injury, such as exhibitionism or inappropriate touching 
(Simpson, Tate, Ferry, Hodgkinson, & Blaszczynski, 2001). However, neuropsy¬ 
chological evaluations of people incarcerated for sexual offenses have not been 
able to consistently document any brain dysfunction. Nor has research been able to 
identify any specific site in the brain consistently involved in the sexually aberrant 
behavior. Overall, though, evidence that brain injury can lead to behaviors such as 
inappropriate touching and exhibitionism suggest that more research is needed in 
this area. Abnormalities in the excitatory and inhibitory functions of the brain as 
they relate to sexuality may be involved in the paraphilias (Toates, 2009). Stress and 
substance use undermine a person’s ability to engage in self-restraint, and people 
with paraphilia sometimes intentionally avoid thinking about negative outcomes for 
their actions; all of these result in reduced inhibitory function. 

A link has been found between a person having a paraphilia and report¬ 
ing high rates of sexual behavior, including use of pornography, frequency of 
masturbation, and numbers of sexual partners (Langstrom & Seto, 2006). 
Researchers are exploring how this heightened focus on sexuality might be 
related to paraphilias. Some have speculated that hormonal abnormalities might 
be related, but findings have not consistently supported this theory. 

People incarcerated for paraphilias were more likely to have been emotion¬ 
ally, physically, and sexually abused as children; were more likely to have had 
behavior problems as children; and were more likely to have come from dys¬ 
functional families than people incarcerated for nonviolent and nonsexual crimes 
(Lee, Jackson, Pattison, & Ward, 2002). Some researchers argue that this his¬ 
tory of trauma and family dysfunction is an important etiological factor for the 



198 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


paraphilias. Exhibitionism has been linked to childhood emotional abuse, family 
dysfunction, and childhood behavior problems. Men with exhibitionism were 
more likely to report that their parents were less caring (Bogaerts, Vanheule, 
Leeuw, & DeSmet, 2006). Some features of Pete’s background, however, are 
similar to characteristics of exhibitionists in general. Many exhibitionists grow 
up in families in which there is a considerable amount of disturbance (Murphy, 
1997). Furthermore, their marriages tend to be dysfunctional, with special dif¬ 
ficulties in sexual adjustment. Interpersonally, exhibitionists tend to be socially 
isolated, with few close friends. 

Some researchers propose that paraphilias may be understood as a disorder 
of courtship behaviors and skills in men. They hypothesize that men who have 
difficulty understanding interpersonal cues or who lack the social skills to follow 
societally accepted patterns of expressing sexual interest may develop a para¬ 
philia. The penile plethysmograph, a device that measures the circumference of 
the penis, was used in a study of male exhibitionists to determine whether they 
are sexually aroused by stimuli that do not arouse nonexhibitionists (Fedora, 
Reddon, & Yeudall, 1986). Compared with normal men and with sex offend¬ 
ers who had committed violent assaults, the exhibitionists showed significantly 
greater arousal to slides of fully clothed women in nonsexual situations, such as 
riding on an escalator or sitting in a park; they showed similar levels of sexual 
interest in erotic and sexually explicit slides. These results suggest that exhibi¬ 
tionists misread cues in the courtship phase of sexual contact, in the sense that 
they construe certain situations to be sexual that are judged to be unerotic by 
people without exhibitionism. In a more recent study using similar methods, 
it was found that exhibitionists also showed relatively more sexual arousal to 
scenes of violence, consistent with the fact that some of them do commit violent 
offenses (Seto & Kuban, 1996). Sexual arousal to violence was the best predic¬ 
tor of sexual reoffending in a longitudinal study of sex offenders over a 20-year 
period (Kingston, Seto, Firestone, & Bradford, 2010). 

Others have speculated that sexual offenders have a deficit in social skills, 
which makes it difficult for them to form intimate romantic relationships. 
Emmers-Sommer et al. (2004) examined 10 studies of sex offenders to evalu¬ 
ate their social skills. They found that sex offenders have poorer social skills. In 
Pete’s case, this is consistent with his difficulties in forming peer relationships 
and his difficulties relating in his marriage. 

A learning-based conceptualization of Pete’s case, which in part guided his 
therapy, involves the following considerations. First, during early adolescence, 
Pete experienced a chance conditioning trial in which orgasm was linked to 
rubbing. Although a single experience like this one would not likely produce a 
durable effect, the link between rubbing and orgasm may have been strength¬ 
ened through the many similar experiences he arranged between himself and 
his sister and the repetition of these encounters in his masturbation fantasies. His 
initial failure in conventional intercourse, coupled with his lack of social skills 
and infrequent dates, maintained his interest in frottage and set the stage for the 



Chapter 13 Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 199 


development of exhibitionism. Finally, his unsatisfactory sexual relationship 
with his wife did not provide him with an opportunity to give up his old behavior 
patterns. 

This account is still incomplete in many respects. Why did Pete reinforce 
his habit of frottage with his younger sister? What led him to exhibit instead 
of trying to develop skills that might have enabled him to date and to enjoy 
more conventional sexual pleasures? Why did his sexual fantasies involve the 
idea that exhibiting or rubbing would sexually arouse women? The theory also 
implies that early sexual experiences have very durable effects, but it appears 
that early sexual experiences need not have lifelong effects. The point has been 
clearly made in a study of the Sambia tribe in New Guinea (Bhugra, Popelyuk, 
& McMullen, 2010). All male members of the tribe are exclusively homosex¬ 
ual from age 7 to marriage. During a first stage from 7 years old to puberty, the 
boys perform fellatio on older boys as often as possible because it is their belief 
that they have to drink a lifetime’s supply of semen. From puberty to marriage, 
women are taboo, and the young men are fellated often by the younger boys. 
After marriage, the tribesmen become completely heterosexual. Their early 
homosexual experiences apparently have had little effect on their capacity for 
and interest in heterosexual arousal. 

Treatment 

Treatment of the paraphilias has often been complicated by the involvement of 
the criminal justice system and its goal of punishing crime and preventing reof¬ 
fending. Interventions have included involuntary surgical castration (Gordon, 
2008). There are very few controlled studies of the effectiveness of particular 
therapies in treating exhibitionism, frotteurism, and the other paraphilias. A 
major reason for the lack of controlled studies is the ethical problem that would 
be created by withholding treatment from the control group and then releas¬ 
ing them into the community untreated. Results from the studies that do exist 
are highly variable, with success rates from about 30 to 90% (Marshall, Jones, 
Ward, Johnston, & Barabee, 1991). The warmth, empathy, and encouragement 
of the therapist are especially strongly related to the effectiveness of the treat¬ 
ment for men with paraphilias (Marshall, Marshall, & Serran, 2006). These 
therapist traits help to overcome the client’s defensiveness and resistance to 
treatment because motivation for change is characteristically low, and research 
suggests that they may even be more powerful than the specific type of treatment 
used in determining who does and does not reoffend. 

Cognitive-behavioral interventions have evolved from focusing on the 
application of single techniques to more multidimensional treatments. An exam¬ 
ple of the former is aversion therapy to reduce the attractiveness of exhibiting 
(Marshall, Eccles, & Barbaree, 1991). Contemporary treatments include over¬ 
coming denial of responsibility, improving the capacity to form interpersonal 
relationships by strengthening social skills and addressing thoughts about the 



200 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


self, and directly modifying deviant sexual arousal patterns, as well as relapse 
prevention and aftercare (Marshall et al., 2006). 

Pete’s therapy illustrates the use of multiple procedures. One component of 
the therapy was similar to a procedure originally developed by Davison (1968) 
in treating a case of a young man who required sadistic fantasies to produce 
sexual arousal. As in the present case, Davison had the client initiate sexual 
arousal with a sadistic fantasy and then masturbate while looking at a picture of 
a nude woman. If arousal began to wane, he could return to his sadistic images, 
but he was told to ensure that orgasm was associated only with the picture. As 
therapy progressed, the sadistic fantasies were relied on less and less until the 
client could masturbate to orgasm relying only on the stimulation produced by 
the nudes. Like Davison’s client, Pete learned to become fully aroused and reach 
orgasm by changing his masturbatory fantasies from exhibiting and frottage to 
conventional intercourse. 

Changing the masturbation fantasies of the person with a paraphilia is a 
common type of treatment. Dandescu and Wolfe (2003) examined the use of fan¬ 
tasy among people with exhibitionism and pedophilia who were in mostly court- 
ordered treatment. Of the 82 participants in their sample, 25 were exhibitionists. 
The majority of both participant types experienced deviant masturbatory fanta¬ 
sies prior to engaging in their first sexual experience related to the paraphilia. 
For the exhibitionists, 76% had deviant masturbatory fantasies before their first 
offense, and 88% did after their first offense. The average number of deviant fan¬ 
tasies increased after the first offense. This suggests that deviant masturbatory 
fantasies are a critical part of the etiology and maintenance of paraphilias for 
most but not all men with paraphilias. 

Another procedure used with Pete is called alternative behavioral comple¬ 
tion (Maletzky, 1997). It involves imagining a scene in which the urge to exhibit 
appears but is overcome by relaxation. In addition, Pete came to change the fan¬ 
tasies that attractive women elicited by practicing new ones, first with pictures 
and then with women he encountered in the natural environment. Attempts were 
also made to alter his distorted cognitions and increase his empathy toward his 
victims. Finally, a reduction in marital conflict and an improved sexual relation¬ 
ship between him and his wife likely contributed to the overall success of the 
therapy. 

Biological interventions have also been employed. Case studies suggest¬ 
ing positive outcomes have been reported for antidepressants and antianxiety 
drugs (Abouesh & Clayton, 1999; Terao & Nakamura, 2000). Researchers have 
evaluated an antiandrogen cyproterone acetate for treatment of paraphilia, which 
decreases all sexual behavior. In studies with exhibitionists, it was found to be 
effective in completely eliminating deviant behavior for some even after its dis¬ 
continuation, but it does have side effects (Bradford, 2001). Several studies have 
also been conducted with medroxyprogesterone acetate, a drug that reduces tes¬ 
tosterone levels and thereby lowers sexual arousal. Although effective in reduc¬ 
ing recidivism when taken regularly, the disorders recur when the treatment is 



Chapter 13 Paraphilias: Exhibitionism and Frotteurism 201 


discontinued (Meyer, Cole, & Emory, 1992). This is problematic because the 
drug produces a number of unpleasant side effects that are likely to lead to dis¬ 
continuation. A newer testosterone-lowering medication, leuprolide acetate, has 
shown promise in the treatment of paraphilia and has fewer side effects (Saleh, 
Niel, & Fishman, 2004). 


Discussion Questions 


1. What childhood experiences do you think were particularly important in the 
development of Pete’s paraphilias? How do you think they relate to his later 
symptoms? 

2. One common characteristic among men with paraphilias is a lack of con¬ 
sideration of the effects of one’s sexual behaviors on others. How did Pete 
manifest this? Did it also extend to other areas of his life? 

3. What are some of the particular challenges and difficulties in conducting 
research on people with paraphilias? How could this affect what we know 
about paraphilias? 

4 . Pete disclosed to his therapist that he had been having affairs. Do you think 
the therapist should have encouraged him to confess this to Helen? Why? 
Would it help or hurt? 




CHAPTER 14 


Gender Identity Disorder: 
Transsexualism 


Chris Morton was a 21-year-old senior in college. In most respects, she was an 
exceptionally well-adjusted student, successful academically and active socially. 
Her problem involved a conflict in gender identity—a problem so fundamen¬ 
tal that it is difficult to decide whether to refer to Chris as he or she, although 
Chris used the masculine pronoun. We have somewhat arbitrarily decided to use 
the feminine pronoun in relating this case because it may be less confusing to 
the reader. And in many respects this is a confusing case. It calls into question 
one of the most fundamental, and seemingly irrefutable, distinctions that most of 
us make—the distinction between men and women. 

Chris’s physical anatomy was that of a woman. But this distinction was not 
made easily on the basis of overt, physical appearance. She was tall and slender: 
5'8" and about 130 pounds. Her hips were narrow and her breasts, which she 
wrapped with an Ace bandage under her clothes, were small. Chris’s face was 
similarly androgynous; her skin had a soft, smooth appearance, but her features 
were not particularly delicate or feminine. Her hair was cut short, and she wore 
men’s clothes. A typical outfit included Levi’s and a man’s shirt with a knit tie 
and a sweater vest. She wore men’s underwear and men’s shoes, often Oxfords 
or penny loafers. She also wore a man’s ring on her right hand and a man’s 
wristwatch. Her appearance was generally neat and preppy. At first glance, it 
was not clear whether Chris was a man or a woman. Listening to Chris’s voice 
did not provide any more useful clues because it was neither deep nor high 
pitched. Many people assumed that she was a man; others were left wondering. 

On the basis of her own attitudes and behaviors, Chris considered herself to be 
like men. Like other transsexuals, she described herself as being a man trapped in a 
woman’s body. She did not consider herself to be confused about her gender iden¬ 
tity. From a biological point of view, Chris recognized that she was not a man. She 
knew that she had breasts and a vagina. She menstruated. But there was more to it 
than physical anatomy. In every other way possible, and for as long as she could 


202 



Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 203 


remember, Chris had always felt more male than female. When she tried to explain 
this feeling to others, she would say, “You can think what you want—and I know 
that most people don’t want to believe this—but if you spend time with me, talk to 
me, you will see what 1 mean. You’ll know that I am not a woman.’’ The details of 
this subjective perception, the experiences that served as support for Chris’s belief, 
lie at the core of our notions of what is feminine and what is masculine. 

Chris felt a sense of camaraderie in the presence of men. She wasn’t sexu¬ 
ally attracted to them, and it never would have occurred to her to flirt with them. 
She wanted to be buddies with them—to swap stories about adventures and 
compare notes on sexual exploits with women. They were her friends. In her 
behavior toward women, Chris was often characteristically masculine and exces¬ 
sively polite; she liked to hold doors for women, to pull out their chairs when 
they sat down to eat, to stand up when they entered a room. This is, of course, 
not to say that these behaviors are innately masculine, for they are learned as 
part of our upbringing. Chris felt more comfortable behaving this way because it 
made her feel masculine, and she said it seemed natural. 

People responded in a variety of ways when meeting Chris for the first time. 
Most assumed that she was a man, but others took her to be a woman. Chris usu¬ 
ally corrected people if they happened to address her as a woman. For example, 
if an instructor used a feminine pronoun when addressing or describing Chris dur¬ 
ing an initial meeting, she would quickly say “he” or “his.” In situations that might 
arouse curiosity or attract attention, Chris tried to adopt exaggerated male postures 
or vocal patterns to overcome the observer’s sense of ambiguity. One example 
occurred when she walked into a small seminar for the first time, Chris sauntered 
across the room, sat down so her legs crossed with one heel on the other knee, and 
then slouched down in the chair, adopting a characteristically masculine posture. 
When answering the phone, she usually tried to lower the pitch of her voice. 

Chris was sexually attracted to women, and consistent with her male gen¬ 
der identity (her conviction that she was more like men than women), she con¬ 
sidered herself to be heterosexual. In fact, she had had two long-term, intimate 
relationships, and both were with other women. Her present lover, Lynn, was a 
26-year-old bisexual who treated Chris as a man and considered their relation¬ 
ship to be heterosexual. Lynn said that when they first met, she thought that Chris 
was a woman and she was attracted to her as a woman. But as their relationship 
developed, Lynn came to think of Chris as a man. Part of this impression could be 
traced to physical behaviors. Lynn agreed that making love with Chris was more 
like making love with a man than a woman. Although this impression was difficult 
to describe in words, it seemed to revolve around the way Chris held her and 
touched her. Perhaps more important were the emotional and intellectual quali¬ 
ties that Lynn noticed. Chris cried about different things than Lynn cried about 
and seemed unable to empathize with many of Lynn's experiences—experiences 
that seemed characteristically feminine. She was surprised, for example, at Chris’s 
apparent inability to empathize with her discomfort during menstruation. And 
Lynn was often surprised by Chris’s questions. Once when they were making 



204 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 

love, Chris asked Lynn what it felt like to have something inside her vagina. It was 
a sensation Chris had never experienced (and never wanted to experience). 

Chris’s parents had known about her gender identity conflict since her senior 
year in high school. This was a difficult issue for them to address, but they both 
assured Chris that their love for her was more important than their concern about 
the problems she would face as a transsexual. Their reactions were also very dif¬ 
ferent. Chris’s mother accepted the problem and made every effort to provide 
emotional support for Chris. Her father, on the other hand, seemed to deal with 
the issue at a more intellectual level and continued to believe that it was merely a 
phase that she was going through. Both were opposed to her interest in physical 
treatment procedures that might permanently alter her appearance. 

Although Chris’s life was going well in most respects, she wanted to 
do something about her body to make it more compatible with her mascu¬ 
line gender identity. Several options seemed reasonable. First, she wanted to 
have her breasts removed. She also wanted to begin taking male hormones so 
that her voice would deepen and she would grow facial hair. Finally, she wanted 
to have surgery to remove her uterus and ovaries, primarily because their con¬ 
tinued presence might conflict with the consumption of testosterone. Although 
she would also have preferred to have a penis, she did not want to go through 
genital surgery because it would not leave her with a functional male organ. 
Furthermore, the possibility of “mutilating” her existing organs and losing her 
capacity for orgasm through clitoral stimulation frightened her. 

One interesting feature of Chris’s masculine identity was revealed in her 
discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of the physical procedures 
involved in changing her body. Lynn mentioned, for example, the possible 
traumatic consequences of losing the capacity to bear children. What if Chris 
decided in a few years that she had been mistaken and now wanted to raise a 
family? The idea was totally foreign to Chris! It was a concern that never would 
have occurred to her. For Chris, the justification for the change was primarily 
cosmetic. Her concern involved plans for the future. “Right now I can pass for 
a young man. That’s okay when I’m 21, but what happens when I’m 40 and 
still look like I’m 20 because I don’t have facial hair? I can’t date 20-year-old 
women all my life. I wouldn’t be happy.” 

During her senior year in college, Chris made an appointment to see a psy¬ 
chologist at the student health center on campus. She wanted to talk about her 
desire to take male hormones and alter her body surgically. Although she had 
thought about the decision for a long time and discussed it with several other 
people, she wanted to get the opinion of a mental-health professional. 


Social History 


Chris was the oldest of four children. She had one brother, who was 1 year 
younger than she, and two younger sisters. 




Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 205 


Chris said that she had always felt like a boy. Other people viewed her as 
a typical “tomboy,” but Chris recognized the difference. When she was very 
young, she and her brother and their father played together all the time. Sports 
were a central activity in the family, especially basketball. Mr. Morton spent 
numerous hours teaching Chris and her brother Rick to dribble and shoot bas¬ 
kets on their driveway. These were pleasant memories for Chris, but she also 
remembered feeling excluded from this group as she and her brother grew older. 
For example, at that time, Little League rules prohibited girls from participating, 
and Chris found that she was generally discouraged from playing with boys in 
the organized games that became more common when they were 9 or 10 years 
old. She and her brother both played on organized youth teams, and their father 
served as a coach for both of them. But Chris had to play on girls’ teams, and 
she didn’t think that was fair, either for her or to the other girls. She remembered 
thinking to herself that, although she was always the best player on the girls’ 
team, she would have been only an average player on a boys’ team, and that was 
where she felt she belonged. When she got to high school, she finally quit the 
team, despite the fact that she was one of the best players, because she didn’t 
want her name or picture to appear in the paper as being part of a girls’ team. 

Although Chris spent a great deal of time with her father and brother, she 
also had a good relationship with her mother, whom she remembers as being 
a source of emotional support and sympathy in difficult times. Her mother was 
not athletically inclined, so she didn’t participate in the activities of Mr. Morton 
and the children, but she and Chris did spend time talking and shopping together. 
On the other hand, Chris was never interested in many of the other activities that 
some girls share with their mothers, such as cooking. 

She also wasn't interested in playing with toys that many other girls pre¬ 
ferred. She and Rick shared most of their favorite toys, including slot cars, toy 
soldiers, and baseball cards. She and a friend did play with Barbie dolls for a 
while, but they only did so when combining them with G.I. Joes and weaving 
them into mock wars and sexual adventures. 

When she started school and began meeting other children in public 
situations, Chris began to confront and think about issues that are taken for 
granted by virtually everyone else. How many children, for example, ever 
think twice about which bathroom to use? As early as first- and second grade, 
Chris could remember feeling uncomfortable about using the girls’ room. 
In the first grade, she attended a parochial school in which the girls were 
required to wear uniforms. She wore the dress and had her hair long and in a 
ponytail but that changed as soon as she reached the second grade. After their 
parents arranged for Chris and Rick to transfer to a public school, Chris cut 
her hair very short and began wearing slacks and shirts that made her indistin¬ 
guishable from the boys. 

Similar issues centered on locker rooms. When Chris was 9 years old, her 
mother arranged for her and Rick to take swimming lessons at a public pool. 
Chris developed a crush on a cute girl in her class. She remembered feeling 



206 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


ashamed and embarrassed at being in the same locker room with the other girls 
and being seen in a girl’s swimming suit. 

Chris’s sex play as a child involved little girls rather than little boys. When 
she was 9 years old, Chris spent long hours “making out’’ with an 11-year-old 
neighbor girl, who also experimented sexually with many of the young boys 
in their neighborhood. Thus, even at this fairly young age, Chris was sexually 
attracted to girls rather than boys. She had numerous opportunities to play sex 
games with young boys, who occasionally asked Chris to “mess around,” but she 
wasn’t interested. Girls were more attractive and interesting. 

By the time she reached junior high school, Chris had begun systemati¬ 
cally to avoid using her given name, Christine. She also came to dislike Chris, 
because although it is a name that is used by both men and women, she thought 
of it as being more feminine. She came instead to be known by her nickname, 
“Morty,” which sounded more masculine to her. 

Adolescence presented a difficult turning point for Chris. The separation 
of the sexes became more obvious. All of the girls wanted to wear dresses and 
date boys. Chris wanted to wear pants and date girls. The situation became even 
more frustrating in high school as her body began to change in obvious ways. 
The onset of menstruation was awkward, and the development of her breasts 
presented an even more difficult situation because their presence could be 
noticed by other people. As soon as her breasts began to enlarge, Chris began 
binding them tightly with a skin-colored belt that would not show through her 
shirt. The belt often left bruises on her chest. When she had to change clothes for 
gym class, she always had to find an isolated locker, away from the other girls, 
so that no one would see her taking off the belt. Nevertheless, the discomfort 
and pain associated with this procedure were preferable to the embarrassment of 
having other people realize that she was developing a woman’s body. 

Chris continued to have a lot of friends and to be active in academic and 
extracurricular activities despite her discomfort with gender-specific roles 
and behaviors. In fact, she was so popular and well respected by the other 
students that she was elected president of her freshman class in high school. 
Although she dressed in masculine clothes, everyone knew that she was a girl 
because she was forced to take the girls’ gym class at school. Many of the social 
activities in which Chris and her friends engaged centered on roller-skating in 
the evening and on weekends. Large numbers of teenagers from their own 
school and several others in the city gathered at the roller-skating rink to skate to 
rock music, eat pizza, and have a good time. Because she was a good athlete and 
enjoyed physical activity, these were pleasant times for Chris. There were awk¬ 
ward moments, however, such as when the disc jockey would announce “girls 
only” or “boys only.” In either case, Chris would leave the rink; she didn’t want 
to be seen with the girls and wasn’t allowed to be with the boys. 

Chris’s parents separated and were eventually divorced when she was a 
sophomore in high school. Because their parents had concealed the fact that 



Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 207 


they were not getting along, the news came as a shock to all of the children. In 
retrospect, Chris said that she should have known that something was going on 
because her parents had been spending so much time together talking quietly 
in their room; her parents had usually been content to go their separate ways. 
There were, of course, hard feelings on both sides, but the arrangements for the 
separation were made to minimize the children’s involvement in the dispute. 
They continued to live with their mother and visited their father on weekends. 

When Chris was 17, she finally decided to have a talk with her mother about 
her discomfort with femininity. She told her mother that she wanted to be a boy. 
Her mother’s reply was, “I know you do. I was also a tomboy when 1 was your 
age, but you’ll grow out of it.” Her mother tolerated her masculine dress but 
didn’t seem to comprehend the depth of Chris’s feelings. 

Chris’s best friends in high school were three boys who spent most of 
their time together. They were the liberal intellectuals of the class. These boys 
accepted Chris as one of their group without being concerned about her gen¬ 
der. One of her friends later told her, “I never really thought of you as a girl. 
I guess it wasn’t important. You were just Morty.” She did attract some attention, 
however, from other children and teachers. She wore men’s pants and shirts, and 
sometimes ties and sport coats. Chris and her friends were also good dancers 
and spent a lot of time on weekends at a local club. They were the life of the 
party. When they arrived, everyone else started dancing and having fun. 

Sex presented an extremely frustrating dilemma for Chris. She was attracted 
to girls, as were all of her male friends. When the boys talked—in the usual 
crude adolescent way—about girls they knew, Chris wanted to join in. But all 
of her friends knew that she was a girl. She was particularly attracted to one girl, 
Jennifer, who had moved to their school the previous year. Jennifer was bright, 
attractive, and engaging. Her appearance and manners were quite feminine. She 
spent a lot of time with Chris and her friends, but she was going with a boy who 
was the captain of the basketball team. Chris and Jennifer began to spend more 
and more time together as the school year wore on. They talked on the phone 
every night for at least an hour and were virtually inseparable on weekends. 

During their junior year, Jennifer’s boyfriend moved away to go to college. 
The relationship began to deteriorate, but Jennifer didn't know how to break 
things off. Chris became her principal source of emotional support during these 
difficult months. Chris became very fond of Jennifer and recognized that she 
was sexually attracted to her but feared that she might destroy their relationship 
if she mentioned these feelings to Jennifer. 

This all changed rather abruptly one Saturday evening. They went to see 
a movie together, and as they were sitting next to each other in the darkened 
theater, Jennifer became conscious of the strong emotional attraction that she 
felt toward Chris. She sat wishing that Chris would put her hand on her leg or 
put her arm around her. Jennifer explained these feelings to Chris as they drove 
home after the film was over, and Chris, in turn, made an effort to explain her 



208 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


feelings for Jennifer. They continued the discussion inside Jennifer’s house and 
eventually retired to Jennifer’s bedroom, where they spent the rest of the night 
talking and making love. 

Their physical relationship—which both Chris and Jennifer considered to 
be heterosexual in nature—was an exceptionally pleasant experience for both 
of them. It was not without its awkward moments, however. For example, Chris 
would not let Jennifer touch her breasts or genitals for the first 6 months after 
they began having sex. She touched Jennifer with her mouth and hands, but did 
not let Jennifer reciprocate beyond holding and kissing. In fact, Chris always 
kept her pants on throughout their lovemaking. This hesitation or resistance was 
primarily due to Chris’s sense that she was in the wrong body. If she allowed 
Jennifer to touch her, they would both be reminded that she had a woman’s 
body. This was frustrating for both of them, but especially for Jennifer, who by 
this point was not concerned about whether Chris was a man or a woman. She 
was simply in love with Chris as a person and wanted a complete, reciprocal 
relationship. Chris was also frustrated because she continued to feel—despite 
Jennifer’s frequent protests to the contrary—that she could not satisfy Jennifer 
in the way that Jennifer most wanted because she did not have a penis. Their 
relationship gradually extended to allow more open physical reciprocity, prima¬ 
rily as a result of Jennifer’s gentle insistence. Chris found that she enjoyed being 
stimulated manually and orally by Jennifer and had no trouble reaching orgasm. 

Chris and Jennifer were able to continue their intimate relationship without 
interference from their parents because their parents viewed Chris as a girl and 
never considered the possibility that she and Jennifer were lovers. They frequently 
spent nights together at Jennifer’s house without arousing any serious suspicion. 
Jennifer’s mother occasionally made comments and asked questions about Chris’s 
masculine wardrobe and manners, but she was totally oblivious to the complexities 
of Chris’s behavior and to the nature of her daughter’s involvement. 

Despite Jennifer’s obvious affection for Chris, their relationship created prob¬ 
lems as Jennifer became increasingly sensitive to the reactions of other people. 
Part of the problem centered on gossip that spread quickly through their school, 
despite attempts by Chris and Jennifer to conceal the fact that they were dating. 
Other students had always been reasonably tolerant of Chris’s masculine behav¬ 
ior, but their criticism became more overt when a close friend, in whom they had 
confided, let it become known that Chris and Jennifer were dating each other. That 
seemed to step beyond most other students’ limit for acceptable behavior. 

Their sexual relationship ended during Chris’s freshman year at college. 
Jennifer’s mother discovered some intimate love letters that Chris had written 
to Jennifer, who was also in college. She was furious! She threatened to discon¬ 
tinue financial support for Jennifer’s education and refused to let her be in their 
home as long as Jennifer continued to see Chris. The pressure was simply too 
much. Chris and Jennifer continued to be good friends, but the romantic side of 
their relationship had to be abandoned. Jennifer dated two or three men after¬ 
ward and was eventually married. 



Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 209 


After breaking up with Jennifer, Chris met and dated a few other women 
before starting her relationship with Lynn. One of these encounters is particularly 
interesting because it also provides some insight into Chris’s sexual orientation 
and gender identity. One of her male friends from high school, Robert, was also 
a freshman at the university. They continued to spend a lot of time together and 
eventually talked openly about Chris’s “story” and the fact that Robert was gay. 
Both admitted considerable interest regarding sexual response in bodies of the 
opposite sex—responses that neither had had the opportunity to observe. To sat¬ 
isfy their curiosity, they decided to have sex with each other. Chris later described 
it as a pleasant experience, but one that felt uncomfortable. They engaged in 
mutual masturbation, but Chris did not allow him to penetrate her vagina with his 
penis. Chris had never experienced a sexual encounter with a male before, and 
her principal interest was in observing Robert’s behavior. She wanted to watch 
him become aroused and reach orgasm. She had always sensed that her own sex¬ 
ual behavior was more like that of a man than a woman, and this would give her 
a chance to decide. She ended the evening convinced more than ever that her own 
behavior was masculine and that she was not sexually attracted to men. 

Chris strongly preferred monogamous relationships. This was in part a mat¬ 
ter of convenience because it was obviously very difficult for her to get to know 
someone with sufficient intimacy to begin a sexual relationship. It was also a 
matter of choice. She did not understand, for example, how some people— 
particularly males—could be so promiscuous. 

During her sophomore year in college, Chris stumbled across some litera¬ 
ture on transsexualism. This was the first time that she realized that other people 
experienced the same feelings that she had and that the condition had a formal 
label. In addition to the comfort that she was not alone in this dilemma, she also 
obtained some useful information. For example, she learned that many transsex¬ 
ual females use Ace bandages, rather than belts, to bind their breasts. She felt 
much more comfortable after the change. She also learned about the possibilities 
of hormonal treatments and various surgical procedures that might be used to 
alter the appearance of her body. Recognition of these alternatives led Chris 
to pursue extensive reading at the university library. Having decided that she 
would like to change the appearance of her body, she made an appointment at 
the student health center. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


When Chris came to see a psychologist at the student health center, she did 
not indicate that she wanted to change her behavior. Extended consultation 
with a mental-health professional is generally considered to be a prerequi¬ 
site for the other procedures that might be used to alter her appearance. Chris 
sincerely wanted to learn as much as possible about her feelings and motiva¬ 
tions for change before embarking on a difficult set of procedures that carried 




210 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


some possibility for health hazards. She knew, for example, that the hormone 
treatments might lead to the development of acne and that the hair on the top of 
her head might begin to thin out. Although she felt strongly about her masculine 
gender identity, she was willing to consider the possibility that she needed psy¬ 
chological treatment rather than the sex-change procedure. 

Chris’s exceptional social adjustment was an important consideration in 
the evaluation of her condition. She was clearly functioning at a high level; her 
grades were good, and she had lots of friends—many of whom knew her only 
as a man—and she was satisfied with her current sexual relationship, which was 
based on her masculine identity. Even if procedures were available to alter her 
gender identity and convince Chris to act and feel like a woman, it did not seem 
likely that she could be any better adjusted. And, in all probability, she would 
have been miserable. Therefore, the psychologist decided that she would not try 
to persuade her that her problem regarding gender identity was the manifesta¬ 
tion of more deeply ingrained psychopathology. She played a supportive role as 
Chris made her own decision about the pending medical procedures. 


Fifteen-Year Follow-Up 


In the following pages, we describe many important experiences that Chris has 
had since this case was originally written. Chris is now living as a man. This 
successful transition leads us to use the masculine pronoun, “he,” when referring 
to Chris in this update. 

Chris attended psychotherapy on a regular basis for approximately 2 years. As 
Chris had hoped, the psychologist referred him to an endocrinologist (a physician 
who specializes in disorders of the hormonal system) after the first year of psycho¬ 
therapy. The doctor asked Chris to complete a battery of psychological tests and a 
psychiatric evaluation prior to beginning hormone therapy. The doctor wanted this 
information so that he could be certain that transsexualism was the correct diagnosis. 

The psychological test profile and psychiatrist’s report indicated that Chris 
was an intelligent person who was able to evaluate the external world objectively. 
There was no evidence of psychotic thinking. The endocrinologist therefore 
granted Chris’s request for hormone therapy. Chris was 22 years old and in his 
first year of graduate school. He can recall with vivid detail the first injection of 
a synthetic male hormone he received at the medical center. The prescription was 
depo-testosterone 300mg (1-1/2 cc) every 3 weeks. He looked at his face in the 
mirror and wondered how he might change physically and emotionally. Would 
he be satisfied with the results? What if he didn’t feel “like himself”? 

The first major physical change came 2 months later with the cessation 
of the menstrual period. There would be no more obvious monthly reminders 
that he was physically female. The other changes were more gradual. His voice 
deepened and cracked just like the voices of pubescent boys. His fat distribu¬ 
tion changed, especially around the hips and thighs. He became more muscular 




Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 211 


and his breast tissue shrank so he no longer had to wear the Ace bandage to con¬ 
ceal his breasts. It would take at least 5 years for the torso bruising (from the 
bandaging) to disappear completely. Chris grew more hair on his arms, legs, 
stomach, and chest. The hair on his face took longer to grow. In the beginning, 
he shaved every 4 to 5 days. He now shaves every other day and sports a hand¬ 
some mustache and goatee. 

Chris had not anticipated a change in his feelings about sex. He had always 
seemed to have a normal sex drive. Nevertheless, his sex drive skyrocketed dur¬ 
ing the first 2 years of hormone therapy. He felt as though he was experienc¬ 
ing puberty all over again. His “first puberty” was spent daydreaming of kissing 
girls and holding hands. Now he could understand the urges adolescent boys 
feel for sex. It was often difficult to think of anything other than sex and how 
to get it. Fortunately, his age and maturity afforded him some control over such 
impulses. Chris developed sexual relationships with three women during gradu¬ 
ate school. He noticed his orgasms were more intense. He was becoming much 
more comfortable with his own body and could even enjoy masturbating. 

Chris could no longer hide the physical changes from his family. People 
were asking questions about his voice, and the hair on his legs was quite 
noticeable. Chris enlisted the help of his father and stepmother, who agreed 
to explain his transsexualism to most of his relatives. But he wanted person¬ 
ally to discuss the situation with his brother and sisters. To Chris’s surprise 
and great relief, not one family member rejected or ridiculed him. Some did 
not understand his psychosexual disorder, but all professed their love as well 
as admiration for his courage in pursuing his dream. He had always enjoyed a 
great deal of support from his friends. Now, with his family’s blessing, he no 
longer had to pretend to be a woman in any aspect of his life. He would now 
be known as a man. 

Chris received a master’s degree and landed his first professional job in 
the crisis department of a major metropolitan hospital. He was initially anx¬ 
ious about being discovered as a transsexual because he was living near the 
area where he grew up. Fortunately, this never happened. Over the next 2 years, 
he grew to trust several colleagues and eventually told them his story. His col¬ 
leagues readily accepted his situation. 

Many transsexuals resort to creative means to pass for the gender they want 
to be. Chris frequently had to think fast on his feet to escape awkward situations. 
He demonstrated considerable ingenuity when he decided it was time to have 
the gender changed on his driver’s license. This is normally a formal process 
that requires a court order and official documents, which he did not possess. He 
devised another approach. He began by renewing his current license, allowing 
his old information to be transferred to the new one. His gender was listed as 
“F” for female. A few days later, he returned to the same license branch and non¬ 
chalantly explained that someone must have made an honest error in recording 
his gender. He noted that it was a common mistake. Sometimes people would 
just look at the name “Chris,” assume the person was female, and record it as 



212 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


such. The clerk apologized profusely and immediately issued a new license. 
He said it was obvious “just by looking” that Chris was male. 

Chris was functioning as a male at work and with his friends. At 25 years 
of age, it was time to consider officially changing his name and gender. Chris 
hired an attorney to help guide him through the legal system. Chris asked 
his psychologist, physician, employer, and friends to write letters of endorse¬ 
ment to the court attesting to his stature as an upstanding citizen in the com¬ 
munity who was living and functioning as a man. Several months later, after a 
5-minute hearing, the judge lowered his gavel and declared Christine to be now 
Christopher and legally male. This was done without any surgeries to remove 
organs (uterus, ovaries, breasts) or to add them (creation of a penis and scrotum). 

To date, Chris has opted to forgo surgical interventions. He accepts his 
body, even though he is not entirely satisfied with it. He wishes that he had been 
born with a penis, but he does not need one to live, function, and be accepted 
as male. He will need medication for the rest of his life, although he now 
requires less testosterone to maintain his outward appearance. He does acknowl¬ 
edge some concern about the medication because the long-term effects of hor¬ 
mone use for female-to-male transsexuals have not been studied extensively. If 
Chris were to stop the injections for several months, the menstrual cycle would 
resume, body fat would redistribute, and his facial hair would be lost. His voice 
would retain its low pitch. Once the vocal cords thicken as the result of male 
hormones, they will remain so unless surgically altered. Chris has no plans to 
stop the medication. 

Important developments have also taken place in Chris’s social life. He 
had always loved Jennifer, his high school sweetheart, despite his involvement 
in other romantic relationships. Jennifer was married, but Chris never lost hope 
of renewing his relationship with her. As luck would have it, they became reac¬ 
quainted while working on their high school 5-year reunion committee. Their 
friendship picked up where it left off. Jennifer confided to Chris that she was 
unhappy in her marriage and was contemplating divorce. Chris hoped that their 
renewed friendship would evolve into something more intimate, but he did not 
want to be the cause of Jennifer’s divorce. Jennifer believed that she would have 
been divorced eventually regardless of her relationship with Chris. 

Jennifer was introduced to Chris’s circle of friends and was invited to their 
social events. Jennifer began to spend occasional nights at Chris’s apartment, 
although they slept separately. After a few months, their relationship became sex¬ 
ual. Sex was now more satisfying to them than it had been before, perhaps because 
Chris was more comfortable with his own body. Despite the excitement and hap¬ 
piness that they found in their new romance, Chris and Jennifer felt uneasy having 
an illicit affair. One year after they became reacquainted, Jennifer filed for divorce 
and moved into an apartment near Chris. Soon, they moved in together. Chris’s 
dream of marrying his high school sweetheart was going to come true. They had 
been living together for 4 years when he proposed to Jennifer. 



Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 213 


Now they had lots of planning to do. Could they apply for a marriage 
license? Who would marry them? Would they need to disclose the fact that Chris 
was transsexual? They struggled with these and many other issues. Their rela¬ 
tionship had faced many obstacles over the years, but could it survive planning 
a wedding? They were confronted with even more stressful situations during 
that year. Jennifer graduated from nursing school and took her licensing board 
examination. Some of Chris’s extended family members refused to attend the 
wedding because of their religious beliefs. Despite these hurdles, they obtained 
a wedding license, found a judge, and had a beautiful ceremony. 

Chris’s life was normal in most ways. He and Jennifer both had success¬ 
ful careers. They bought a house. However, Jennifer felt something was missing. 
She wanted children. Despite a few reservations about parenthood, they forged 
ahead with the process of artificial insemination. They chose an anonymous 
donor who matched Chris’s physical characteristics and personality type. Two 
years later, Jennifer was pregnant. . . with twins! 

Chris and Jennifer faced some unique circumstances, above and beyond 
all the normal anxieties that come with first-time parenthood. Preparing for 
the births of their son and daughter made them wonder how they would handle 
Chris’s transsexuality. How would they deal with their own nudity? How would 
they respond to the children’s normal curiosity about sex? As it turned out, the 
most pressing issues during the first year of parenthood were finding time for 
sleep and keeping enough diapers on hand. 

It would have been impractical to expect that the children would never 
see Chris’s body, though he tried his best to be discreet. Jennifer and Chris 
decided to respond to the children’s questions about sexuality with honest, age- 
appropriate explanations. They learned quickly that all their rehearsed responses 
could be easily thwarted by their children’s brutal honesty. For example, Chris 
recalled a dinner table conversation in which his 3-year-old son announced that 
“when I grow up, I want to be a man without a penis, like Daddy.” Perhaps the 
most interesting implication of this bold declaration is the fact that Chris’s son 
viewed him as a man, despite his physical anatomy. In fact, neither child ever 
confused Chris with a woman. Their daughter sometimes announced proudly to 
her brother, “Mommy and I are girls, and you and Daddy are boys.” To date, 
Chris only once has explained his genitalia to the children. He said, “Daddy’s 
penis didn’t get made all the way. But your penis and vagina were made just 
fine.” Chris knows that the issue will come up again; simple explanations will 
not always be sufficient. 

Chris’s transsexuality is with him every day, but it is no longer the focal 
point in his life. The issues arise infrequently now. Although the old anxieties 
of rejection and ridicule can still be evoked from time to time, he accepts him¬ 
self and lives a full and happy life. Chris does not think of his transsexualism as 
a disorder from which he can be cured. He views it as a condition that he has 
learned to integrate and manage. 



214 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Discussion 


Because the discussion of this case involves a number of subtle and frequently 
controversial issues, it may be helpful to begin with the definition of some ele¬ 
mentary terms. Gender identity involves a person’s belief or conviction that he 
or she is a male or a female. The public expression of this belief involves role- 
specific behaviors associated with masculinity and femininity. Sexual orienta¬ 
tion , on the other hand, represents the person’s preference for male or female 
sexual partners. In the infinite variety of human behavior, there can be endless 
combinations of gender identity, gender-role behaviors, and sexual orienta¬ 
tions (Clemans, DeRose, Graber, & Brooks-Gunn, 2010; Kessler & McKenna, 
2000 ). 

People with gender identity disorders vary considerably with regard to the 
severity and persistence of their problems. Relatively few children who exhibit 
gender identity problems continue to experience similar problems as adults 
(Zucker, 2005). In the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(.DSM-IV-TR', APA, 2000), the term transsexualism is used to describe severe 
gender identity disorder in adults. 

Why is gender identity disorder a controversial topic? Perhaps because it 
raises such difficult questions about the way in which we view ourselves and 
our world. Perhaps because the attitudes of many transsexuals, as well as the 
surgical procedures that have been used to help them attain their goals, are 
inconsistent with popularly held notions about men and women (Lev, 2005). 
The following discussion focuses on clinical and scientific issues involved in the 
study of transsexualism rather than its political and social implications. 

In DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000), gender identity disorder is listed in a general 
section with sexual dysfunctions and paraphilias. There is, of course, an impor¬ 
tant difference between gender identity disorders and sexual disorders. The latter 
are defined primarily in terms of problems that interfere with the capacity for 
reciprocal, affectionate sexual activity. Chris’s situation illustrates why gender 
identity disorders are not considered sexual disorders. Although she was uncom¬ 
fortable with her anatomic sex and wanted to live as a man, she was sexually 
functional and actively involved in a mutually satisfying relationship. 

The DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, pp. 581-582) description of gender identity 
disorder can apply to children, adolescents, or adults. In fact, most transsexuals 
report that their discomfort with their anatomic sex began during childhood. The 
disorder is defined by the following criteria: 

1. A strong and persistent cross-gender identification (not merely a desire for 
any perceived cultural advantages of being the other sex). 

In children, the disturbance is manifested by four (or more) of the 
following; 

a. Repeatedly stated desire to be, or insistence that he or she is, the 
other sex 




Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 215 


b. In boys, preference for cross-dressing or simulating female attire; in 
girls, insistence on wearing only stereotypical masculine clothing 

c. Strong and persistent preferences for cross-sex roles in make-believe 
play or persistent fantasies of being the other sex 

d. Intense desire to participate in the stereotypical games and pastimes of 
the other sex 

e. Strong preference for playmates of the other sex 

In adolescents and adults, the disturbance is manifested by symptoms such 
as a stated desire to be the other sex, frequent passing as the other sex, 
desire to live or be treated as the other sex, or the conviction that he or she 
has the typical feelings and reactions of the other sex. 

2 . Persistent discomfort with his or her sex or sense of inappropriateness in the 
gender role of that sex. 

3. The disturbance is not concurrent with a physical intersex condition. 

4 . The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in 
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 

Because discomfort with one’s anatomic sex and the desire to be rid of 
one’s own genitals form a central part of this definition, it is important to point 
out that transsexuals are not the only people who seek sex-reassignment sur¬ 
gery. People who seek sex-change surgery occasionally include self-stigmatized 
homosexuals who believe that they should be punished, schizoid and psychotic 
individuals, and sadomasochists who derive sexual pleasure from inflicting and 
experiencing physical pain (Sohn & Bosinski, 2007). 

Disturbances in gender identity should also be distinguished from two 
related but generally distinct conditions. First, it would be misleading to say 
that transsexuals are, by definition, delusional. There are, of course, some trans¬ 
sexuals who are psychotic, but the vast majority are not. They acknowledge the 
inconsistency between their anatomy and their gender identity. A delusional 
man might argue, for example, that he is a woman; a transsexual would be more 
likely to say, “I am not a woman anatomically, but I am a woman in almost 
every other way.” Furthermore, unlike delusional patients, whose beliefs are 
completely idiosyncratic, transsexuals are frequently able to convince other peo¬ 
ple that they are right. In Chris’s case, for example, Jennifer and Lynn concurred 
with the belief that Chris was more like a man than a woman. 

Second, there is an important difference between transsexualism and trans- 
vestic fetishism, but the two conditions are not mutually exclusive (Zucker & 
Bradley, 2000). Transvestic fetishism is a disorder in which heterosexual (or 
bisexual) men dress in women’s clothing for the purpose of sexual excitement. 
The gender identity of transvestic fetishists is typically not inconsistent with 
their anatomic sex, and many transsexuals do not become sexually excited by 
cross-dressing. Nevertheless, a substantial proportion of male-to-female trans¬ 
sexuals do become sexually aroused at least occasionally when they dress in 
women’s clothing (Blanchard & Clemmensen, 1988), and some transvestic 



216 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


fetishists do seek sex-reassignment surgery. According to the DSM-IV-TR (APA, 
2000), males who meet the criteria for both gender identity disorder and trans- 
vestic fetishism should be assigned both diagnoses. 

Precise epidemiological data regarding transsexualism are difficult to 
obtain. Estimates of the prevalence of the disorder are based on the number of 
people who apply for treatment rather than comprehensive surveys of the gen¬ 
eral population. We do know that transsexualism is a relatively infrequent prob¬ 
lem and that it may be more common among men than women. Early studies 
reported a male-to-female ratio of approximately 3:1, but the proportion of 
females may be increasing. One study computed prevalence based on the 
number of patients who sought sex-reassignment surgery in Belgium. The inves¬ 
tigators reported a prevalence of 1 transsexual in every 12,900 males and 1 in 
33,800 females (De Cuypere et al., 2007). Data from other studies suggest that, 
when narrow diagnostic criteria are employed, the incidence of new cases may 
be roughly equivalent in men and women (Zucker & Lawrence, 2009). 

Some fairly consistent differences exist between male and female transsexu¬ 
als in terms of psychological characteristics. For example, female transsexuals 
tend to report better relationships with their parents, more stable relationships 
with sexual partners, and greater satisfaction with their sexual experiences prior 
to treatment (e.g., Lewins, 2002). 

Many male transsexuals, perhaps as many as half of those seeking treat¬ 
ment, experience additional psychological problems. The most common symp¬ 
toms are depression, anxiety, and social alienation (Bower, 2001; Campo, 
Nijman, Merckelbach, & Evers, 2003). Some exhibit severe personality dis¬ 
orders, but very few are considered psychotic. The level of psychopathology 
observed in female transsexuals, on the other hand, does not seem to be differ¬ 
ent from that seen in the general population. Chris may therefore be similar to 
other female transsexuals. Aside from the issue of gender identity, he was well- 
adjusted in terms of his mood as well as his social and occupational functioning. 

The relationship between transsexualism and homosexuality has been the 
source of some controversy (Olivers & Bailey, 2000). Some people have argued 
that transsexuals are simply homosexuals who use their cross-gender identity as 
a convenient way of escaping cultural and moral sanctions against engaging in 
sexual behavior with members of their own sex. There are a number of problems 
with this hypothesis. First, unlike transsexuals, homosexual men and women are 
not uncomfortable with their own gender identities. Lesbians, for example, 
are typically proud of their status as women and would be horrified at the sug¬ 
gestion that they want to be men. Second, many transsexuals, like Chris, are not 
obviously uncomfortable with homosexuals. The suggestion that transsexuals 
are denying their homosexual inclinations is sometimes supported by the obser¬ 
vation that some transsexuals go out of their way to avoid any contact or asso¬ 
ciation with homosexual men or women. However, some of Chris’s friends were 
homosexual men and women. One of his previous lovers, Lynn, was bisexual 
and had been living with another woman when they met. 



Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 217 


Etiological Considerations 

It is not clear why some people develop gender identity disorders. In fact, the 
process by which anyone develops a sense of masculine or feminine identity is a 
matter of considerable interest and dispute (Gangestad, Bailey, & Martin, 2000; 
Herman-Jeglinska, Grabowska, & Dulko, 2002). As in other areas of human 
behavior, alternative explanations invoke the ubiquitous nature/nurture contro¬ 
versy. Is gender identity determined genetically prior to the infant’s birth, or is it 
largely determined by biological or social factors that the individual encounters 
in his or her environment? Explanations for the development of transsexualism 
have taken both sides of this argument. 

Some investigators and clinicians have emphasized the importance of the 
parents and family in the etiology of the disorder. Stoller (1985), for example, 
placed principal emphasis in male transsexualism on the absence (either physi¬ 
cal or psychological) of the father and the presence of a close-binding, dominant 
mother. A different family pattern was identified in cases of female transsexual¬ 
ism. In these families, according to Stoller, the mothers are prone to depression. 
Rather than providing support and care for their spouses, the fathers are presum¬ 
ably aloof and uninvolved. Thus, the daughter is forced to fill the supportive, 
masculine role vacated by her father. Other masculine behaviors are also rein¬ 
forced by the father, but femininity is discouraged. 

Chris’s experience was not consistent with Stoller’s hypothesis. His mother was 
not depressed while Chris was a child, and he was not expected to take the place 
of his father. Chris’s parents were not close to each other, but they did not involve 
the children in their disagreements. His masculine gender identity was clearly fixed 
several years before his parents’ conflict became known to the children. Although he 
did not spend a great deal of time with his mother, they did have a good relationship; 
they spoke to each other openly—including several talks about the fact that Chris felt 
more like a boy than a girl—and cared very much for each other. 

Green (1987) proposed a multifaceted model for the development of femi¬ 
nine behavior in boys and masculine behavior in girls. His view places consider¬ 
able emphasis on learning principles such as modeling and social reinforcement. 
According to Green, gender identity disturbances are likely to develop when 
the parent of the opposite sex is dominant and provides the most salient model 
for the child’s social behavior. The same-sexed parent is presumably retiring or 
unavailable. When the child begins to imitate cross-role behaviors, rather than 
objecting, the parents provide attention and praise. Peer relations also play 
a role in Green’s model; feminine boys prefer and spend more time with girls 
while masculine girls spend more time with boys. This combination of parental 
and peer support enhances the process of identification with the opposite sex. 
Eventually, this process of socialization becomes an obstacle to any attempt to 
change the pattern and integrate the child with members of his or her own sex. 

In Chris’s case, his father certainly provided reinforcement for playing mas¬ 
culine games. Chris spent a great deal of time in rough, competitive play with 



218 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


boys. His father also discouraged open displays of emotion, such as crying. It is 
difficult to say, however, that the social reinforcement he provided was definitely 
responsible for Chris’s gender identity disorder, particularly because so many 
other girls are treated in similar ways without becoming transsexual. 

Relatively little empirical evidence is available regarding the influence 
of environmental events in the development of transsexualism. A few research 
studies have compared people with gender identity disorders and control sub¬ 
jects in terms of their recollections of their parents’ behavior. One study found 
that male-to-female transsexuals remembered their fathers as having been less 
warm and more rejecting in comparison to the way in which control subjects 
remembered their fathers (Cohen-Kettenis, & Arrindell, 1990). It is important to 
note, however, that these data were collected after the people with gender iden¬ 
tity disorder were adults and had sought treatment for their condition. It is not 
clear that the styles of interaction that were reported by these people preceded 
or contributed to the original development of their problems in gender iden¬ 
tity. Interactions between the parents and their transsexual sons and daughters 
may have been determined, at least in part, by a reaction to the gender identity 
problems of the children. Prospective data, collected prior to the onset of gender 
identity problems, have not been reported on this issue. Analyses based on com¬ 
parisons of concordance rates in monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twin 
pairs suggest that genetic factors make a larger contribution than environmen¬ 
tal factors in the development of gender identity disorder (Coolidge, Thede, & 
Young, 2002). 

Case studies provide the basis for much speculation regarding the possi¬ 
ble influence of environmental and biological factors in the etiology of trans¬ 
sexualism. For example, Segal (2006) described two pairs of female MZ twins 
who were discordant for gender identity disorder. The author noted that in each 
pair, differences in the twin’s gender identity emerged at a young age. Unusual 
life experiences did not seem to play a causal role in this process. The fact that 
these genetically identical individuals were discordant for the condition indicates 
that genetic factors do not account for all the variance in its etiology. That is, 
of course, not a particularly surprising result because concordance rates in MZ 
twins do not approach 100% for any form of mental disorder. 

Biologically minded investigators (e.g., Diamond, 2009; Hines, 2004) have 
argued that gender identity may be shaped very early, during the development 
of the human embryo, by exposure to male hormones. This possibility suggests 
that Chris’s masculine gender identity is, at least in part, the product of a fun¬ 
damental, biological process. Viewed from a subtle neurological perspective, 
and regardless of the shape of his external sexual characteristics, this argument 
would hold that Chris’s brain is essentially masculine. Unfortunately, although 
there is considerable reason to believe that reliable group differences exist 
between men and women in terms of brain structure and function, there are no 
valid tests that would be useful in this regard at an individual level. The issue is, 
therefore, unresolved. 



Chapter 14 Gender Identity Disorder: Transsexualism 219 


Treatment 

There are two obvious solutions to problems that involve gender identity con¬ 
flict: Change the person’s gender identity to match his or her anatomy, or change 
the anatomy to match the person’s gender identity. Various forms of psycho¬ 
therapy have been used in an attempt to alter the gender identity of transsexual 
patients, but the success of these interventions has been limited. 

As an alternative to trying to change the transsexual’s gender identity, some 
physicians have used surgical procedures to transform transsexuals’ bodies so 
that they will match their gender identities. Surgical procedures can be used to 
alter and construct both male and female genitalia. Some of these methods were 
initially developed for the treatment of problems such as traumatic loss or con¬ 
genital abnormalities. An artificial penis can be constructed from abdominal tis¬ 
sue that is transplanted and formed into a tube. The goals of such surgery may 
include cosmetic considerations (i.e., the construction of an organ that resem¬ 
bles a penis) as well as physiological criteria (e.g., passing urine in a standing 
position, accomplishing intercourse, and sensing stimulation). Although it is 
not possible to construct a completely functional penis that will become erect 
in response to sexual stimulation, erection can be achieved through the use of 
removable implants made of bone, cartilage, or silicone. In the case of female - 
to-male transsexuals, the labia are fused, but the clitoris is left intact and remains 
the primary receptor for sexual stimulation. Prostheses can be inserted to resem¬ 
ble testicles in a scrotum. 

Surgical procedures for transsexuals can become complex and involve sev¬ 
eral areas of the body in addition to the genitals. Surgery for male-to-female 
transsexuals may include breast augmentation as well as changing the size of 
the nose and shaving the larynx. Surgery for female-to-male transsexuals can 
involve a series of steps, including removal of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, 
uterus, and breast tissue. 

Clinical impressions regarding the success of these procedures have been 
positive. Case studies suggest that most patients are pleased with the results of 
the surgery and relieved finally to have the body they desire. Many are able to 
adjust to life as a member of the opposite sex, and some report adequate sex¬ 
ual functioning and marriage (Smith, van Goozen, Kuiper, & Cohen-Kettenis, 
2005). Almost no one reports postsurgical grief over the loss of his sexual organ, 
although isolated cases have occurred. The most frequent complaints center on 
requests for further medical and surgical procedures. In the case of male-to- 
female transsexuals, these requests include improvements in genital appearance 
and functioning, increased breast size, and inhibition of beard growth. 

Although these results seem encouraging, some limitations are associ¬ 
ated with the data used to evaluate the outcome of sex-reassignment surgery. 
Postsurgical adjustment is often assessed in terms of the surgeon’s global, sub¬ 
jective impression of the patient’s adjustment rather than specific measures of 
occupational and social functioning made by people who do not know that the 



220 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


patient had received surgery. Appropriate control groups are seldom employed, 
and follow-up periods are often rather short. Some reports provide a more pes¬ 
simistic picture of surgical outcome (Lindemam, Korlin, & Uddenberg, 1986; 
Meyer & Reter, 1979). 

Surgery and psychotherapy are not the only options available to people with 
gender identity disorders. Chris was already well adjusted in his personal and 
professional roles without surgery. It seems unlikely that the surgical altera¬ 
tion of his body would lead to an even better adjustment. Like Chris, many 
transsexuals forgo surgery but still cross-dress and live full time as a member 
of the opposite gender with the help of hormone therapy. This alternative has 
become a more reasonable and appealing option as the law and popular opin¬ 
ion have become somewhat more tolerant of people with gender identity disor¬ 
ders (Green, 1994; Michel, Ansseau, Legras, Pitchot, & Mormont, 2002). People 
who are considering treatment for gender identity disorders and the mental- 
health professionals who want to help them should consider carefully the many 
thoughtful recommendations that are included in a set of standards of care for 
gender identity disorders, written by an international committee of experts on 
these problems (Levine, 1999). 


Discussion Questions 


1. What are the most important considerations in determining whether a per¬ 
son is a man or a woman? Are there things that matter other than genital 
characteristics? 

2. Jennifer believed that her relationship with Chris was heterosexual in nature. 
On what basis was that argument made? 

3. Chris decided against having sex-reassignment surgery. What would be the 
potential advantages and disadvantages of making that change? What do you 
think you would do if you were in the same situation? 

4 . How would you react if a member of your own family experienced gender 
identity disorder? Imagine that a sister or a brother told you that they were 
trapped in the wrong body. What would you advise your sibling to do? 




CHAPTER 15 


Eating Disorder: 
Anorexia Nervosa 


Joan was a 38-year-old woman with a good job and family life. She lived with 
her second husband, Mitch; her 16-year-old son, Charlie, from her first mar¬ 
riage; and her husband’s 18-year-old daughter from a previous marriage. Joan 
was employed as a secretary at a university, and Mitch was a temporary federal 
employee. Joan was 5'3" and weighed approximately 125 pounds. Although she 
was concerned about her weight, her current attitudes and behaviors were much 
more reasonable than they had been a few years earlier, when she had been diag¬ 
nosed with anorexia nervosa. 

Joan had struggled with a serious eating disorder from the ages of 29 to 34. 
She was eventually hospitalized for 30 days. The treatment she received dur¬ 
ing that hospital stay had finally helped her overcome her eating problems. Four 
years later, her condition continued to be much improved. 


Social History 


Joan was born in a suburb on the outskirts of a large northeastern city. Her one 
brother was 2 years younger. Her father worked as a supervisor for an aircraft 
subcontractor. Joan’s mother stayed at home while the children were young and 
then worked part time for a number of years as a waitress and bookkeeper. Both 
parents were of average weight. 

Joan’s early childhood was ordinary. She was an above-average student and 
enjoyed school. She and her brother bickered, but their disagreements did not 
extend beyond the usual sibling rivalry. Her family lived in a large neighbor¬ 
hood filled with lots of children. Joan was somewhat overweight during elemen¬ 
tary school. She had high personal standards and strove to be a perfect child. 
She always did what was right and conformed completely to the wishes of her 
parents. 


221 




222 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


When Joan was 14 and entering the ninth grade, tragedy struck her 
family and forever changed her home life. She and her 12-year-old brother 
were home while her parents were at work. Although her brother was too old 
to require babysitting, she was supposed to keep an eye on him. Joan had a 
friend over, and the two girls were upstairs in her room. Joan heard some loud 
noise outside and looked out the window. She saw her brother lying dead in 
the road. He had been run over by a car. Although the feeling became less 
intense as years passed, Joan continued to feel guilty about her brother’s 
death well into adulthood. 

After the accident, Joan’s parents changed. They became extremely overpro- 
tective, and Joan felt as if she “had a leash on all of the time.” From age 14 on, 
she no longer had a normal childhood. She could not hang out with friends, be 
away from the house for long periods of time, or go out in cars. Her parents 
wanted to know where she was and what she was doing, and they set a strict 
curfew. Joan knew that if she were late, her parents would worry, so she always 
tried to be home early. She made a special effort to do exactly as she was told. 
Joan did not go out much because she felt the need to stay near her parents so 
that they would know that she was alive and well. 

The rest of high school was unremarkable. Joan earned reasonably good 
grades and got along well with the other students. During the summer after her 
brother’s death, when Joan was 15, she met and began to date a boy who was 
2 years older than she. Joan’s parents were initially unhappy with this relation¬ 
ship, in part because Randy owned a car, and they didn’t want her to ride around 
with him. Joan had to meet Randy secretly for the first few months. As her par¬ 
ents got to know him better, they grew to like him, and the young couple no 
longer had to sneak around. During this time, Joan continued to feel guilty when 
she was in cars because she was reminded of her brother’s death. She frequently 
stayed home because she knew that her parents would suffer horribly if anything 
happened to her. 

After high school, Joan attended a two-year business school and became 
engaged to Randy. The couple was married after Joan graduated. She was 
19 years old as she began her marriage and her first full-time job as a secretary 
in a medical office. Prior to this time, Joan’s father had never allowed her to hold 
even a part-time job. He insisted on providing for all of her needs. 

Although this marriage lasted legally for 6 years, it became clear within 
9 months that the relationship was in trouble. Joan cared for her husband, but 
she did not love him. She soon realized that she had used Randy as an escape 
route from her parents’ home. She felt as if she had simply jumped from one 
dependent relationship into another. When she had been at home, her parents 
provided everything. Now Randy was taking care of her. Joan worried that she 
did not know how to take care of herself. Despite these negative feelings, Joan 
and Randy tried to make the marriage work. They bought a home 1 year after 
their wedding. Two years later, Joan accidentally became pregnant. 



Chapter 15 Eating Disorder: Anorexia Nervosa 223 


Joan gained 80 pounds during the course of her pregnancy. When Charlie 
was bom, she weighed 200 pounds. Over the next few months, Joan found it 
difficult to lose weight but eventually got down to 140 pounds. Although it was 
hard for her to adjust to this weight gain, she did not try to change her weight 
because it felt “safe” to her. Joan and Randy were legally separated 2 years after 
Charlie was born. They continued to see each other occasionally and sought 
marital counseling at various times during the next couple of years. They could 
not reconcile their differences, however, and Randy eventually moved to another 
state. The divorce was finalized when Joan was 25 years old. 

Shortly after she and Randy were separated, Joan stopped working and went 
on welfare. With financial help from her father, she managed to keep up the 
mortgage payments on her house for several months. She and Charlie continued 
to live on their own, but Joan fell further into debt while she and Randy tried to 
work things out. She was forced to sell her home when the divorce became 
final. Although she came to regret the decision, she moved back into her par¬ 
ents’ home. Living there was stressful for Joan. Although she was 25 years old, 
she felt like a child. Her parents once again took care of Joan, and now they 
also provided for her son. In this submissive role, Joan started to feel more like 
Charlie’s older sister than his mother. 

Joan lost some weight after she and Charlie were involved in a serious car 
accident, 6 months after moving back to live with her parents. Charlie was not 
hurt, but Joan’s left hip and leg were broken. She spent a month in the hospi¬ 
tal. She was immobile when she came home, and her mother had to take even 
greater care of her and Charlie, Joan needed repeated surgery on her knee, as 
well as extensive physical therapy, and she had to relearn how to walk. During 
her recovery, she had little appetite, was nauseated, and did not eat much, but 
she was not consciously dieting. Joan’s weight went down to about 110 pounds, 
which she considered to be a reasonable weight. 

While she was recovering from her injuries, Joan became involved with a 
man named Jack, whom she met in one of the hospital’s rehabilitation programs. 
She was now 27 years old. To escape her parents’ overly protective home, she 
decided to take Charlie and move in with Jack. This move actually created more 
problems than it solved, in large part because Jack had a serious problem with 
alcohol. Joan had never been a heavy drinker. In the beginning of their relation¬ 
ship, she drank only during the weekend. After she started living with Jack, 
drinking became a daily activity. Much of their relationship and socializing 
revolved around alcohol. On the average weekday, Joan consumed a couple of 
beers and some wine, or perhaps a glass or two of bourbon. On weekends, she 
drank considerably more. Charlie was increasingly left at day-care centers and 
with babysitters. Joan eventually recognized the destructive nature of this rela¬ 
tionship and ended it after a few months. She reluctantly moved back into her 
parents’ home. After leaving Jack, Joan stopped drinking, except occasionally 
when she was out socializing. 



224 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Onset of the Eating Disorder 


After breaking up with Jack, Joan lived with her parents for 2 more years. When 
she was 29 years old, almost 3 years after her accident, Joan returned to the hos¬ 
pital for more surgery on her leg. After being discharged, she began the diet that 
set the stage for 5 years of serious eating problems and nearly destroyed her life. 
Joan had gained a few pounds while she was drinking heavily and now weighed 
125 pounds. She was concerned that she would start to gain more weight while 
she was inactive, recovering from surgery. 

Joan’s diet was strict from the beginning: She measured and weighed all 
her food. Within a year, she weighed less than 100 pounds. Her food intake was 
severely restricted. During the day, she consumed only coffee with skim milk 
and an artificial sweetener. Occasionally, she ate a piece of fruit or a bran muffin. 
When she and Charlie ate dinner with her parents, Joan took a normal amount of 
food on her plate but played with it rather than eating it. After dinner, she usually 
excused herself to go to the bathroom where she took laxatives in an effort to get 
rid of what little food she had eaten. Joan hardly ate any meats, breads, or starches. 
She preferred fruits and vegetables because they consist mainly of water and fiber. 
Although she did not allow herself to eat, Joan still felt hungry; in fact, she was 
starving most of the time. She thought about food constantly, spent all her time 
reading recipe and health books, and cooked elaborate meals for the family. 

Although she weighed less than 100 pounds, Joan still felt overweight and 
believed that she would look better if she lost more weight. She had an over¬ 
whelming fear of getting fat because she believed that gaining weight would 
mean that she was not perfect. She tried to be a model young adult and struggled 
to be what she imagined everybody else wanted. She gave little thought to what 
she would want for herself. She felt like everything in her life was out of her 
control except for her weight and body. The demonstration of strict self-control 
over eating was a source of pride and accomplishment to Joan. 

As she lost weight, Joan experienced several of the physical effects that 
accompany starvation. Her periods stopped; she had problems with her liver; 
her skin became dry and lost its elasticity; her hair was no longer healthy; and 
she would often get dizzy when she stood up. At this time, Joan was working 
as a secretary in a university medical school. Some of her coworkers noticed 
the drastic change in her appearance and became concerned. An internist in her 
department recognized her symptoms as those of anorexia nervosa and tried to 
get Joan to seek help. Joan agreed to attend an eating disorders support group 
and even went to some outpatient therapy sessions, mostly in an attempt to 
appease her friends. She also consulted a dietician at the university hospital and 
worked on an eating plan. There were moments when Joan considered the pos¬ 
sibility that her behavior was not normal, but most of the time, she viewed her 
ability to control her weight and appetite as a sign of strength. When she was 
transferred to a different department within the university, she left therapy and 
returned to her restrictive dieting. 




Chapter 15 Eating Disorder: Anorexia Nervosa 225 


Joan’s parents were also acutely aware of their daughter’s abnormal patterns 
of eating and her excessive weight loss. They were extremely worried about her 
health. The more they tried to talk to her about this issue, the more resistant she 
became to their pleadings. Arguments about eating became frequent, and the 
level of tension in the home escalated dramatically. 

A year and a half after the onset of her eating disorder, Joan moved with 
Charlie into her own apartment. Her decision was prompted in large part by the 
aversive nature of her interactions with her parents. She continued to diet and 
now weighed about 90 pounds. Charlie’s diet had also become restricted, in part 
because there was very little food in the house. Joan could hardly bring herself 
to go to the grocery store. Once there, she made an effort to behave normally 
and went through the store putting food into her shopping cart. When it came 
time to pay, however, she would not actually buy anything. She believed that 
food was bad and that it was a waste of money. Instead of purchasing anything, 
she would wander up and down the aisles, eating much of what was in her shop¬ 
ping cart. Her reasoning was that it made no sense to pay for food that could be 
eaten while you were in the store. 

This type of binge eating also happened whenever she did manage to buy 
something. In one afternoon, she would occasionally eat two dozen donuts, a 
five-pound box of candy, and some ice cream. After this, Joan took 20 to 30 lax¬ 
atives to rid herself of the food. At times she made herself vomit by sticking a 
toothbrush down her throat, but she preferred to take laxatives. Some weeks she 
did not binge at all, others once or twice. On the days in between binges, she ate 
only a little fruit and drank some liquids. 

Joan’s eating problems persisted for the next 5 years. Her weight fluctuated 
between 90 and 105 pounds during this period. At times she ate more normally, 
but then she would eat practically nothing for months. She tried therapy, though 
she was not seriously or consistently committed to changing her behavior. Her 
life seemed like a roller coaster, as she cycled back and forth between relatively 
healthy patterns of eating, severe restricting, and bingeing and purging. Most of 
her diet consisted of liquids such as diet soda, water, and coffee. Occasionally 
she drank beer, seeking the numbing effect it had on her appetite. She was 
pleased with her weight when it was very low, but she felt horrible physically. 
She was weak most of the time, and other people constantly told her that she 
was too thin. In Joan’s mind, however, she was still too heavy. 

When she was 32 years old, almost 3 years after the onset of her eating 
problems, Joan met Mitch at a church group she was attending. They began to 
date on a regular basis. Mitch was different from all of the other men in Joan’s 
past. He genuinely cared about her, and he also liked her son. Her weight was at 
one of its peaks when they met, somewhere between 100 and 105 pounds, so her 
eating problems were not immediately obvious to him. 

Unfortunately, soon after they began dating, Joan once again began to 
restrict her eating, and her weight quickly dropped to another low point. Mitch 
noticed the obvious change in her behavior and appearance. His reaction was 



226 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


sympathetic. As their relationship grew stronger, Mitch seemed to help Joan 
feel differently about herself. They talked frequently about her weight and how 
little she ate. Mitch expressed great concern about her health, pleading gently 
with her to gain weight, but her restrictive patterns of eating persisted despite 
the other psychological benefits that accompanied the development of this rela¬ 
tionship. One year after she started dating Mitch, Joan needed major abdominal 
surgery to remove two cysts from her small intestine. During the operation, the 
surgeon saw that she had other problems and reconstructed her entire bowel sys¬ 
tem. When she left the hospital, Joan’s weight had fallen to 85 pounds. She ate 
reasonably well at first, trying to regain her strength. After 2 months, she was 
feeling better, returned to work, and went back on a restrictive diet. This time, 
however, Mitch and her friends would not let her continue this prolonged pattern 
of self-imposed starvation. 


Treatment 


Mitch and one of Joan’s friends from the medical school sought help for her. 
Realizing that she would never be free of her problems unless she faced them, 
Joan agreed to contact an eating-disorder specialist. Though it was one of the 
hardest decisions she ever made, Joan had herself committed to a 30-day stay in 
a psychiatric ward. She was now 34 years old. 

Joan’s diet was completely controlled in the hospital. She was started on a 
1,500-calorie-per-day diet and was required to eat three meals a day in the pres¬ 
ence of a staff member. Privileges such as use of the phone, visitors, and outings 
were made contingent on eating. Specific goals were set for weight gain, and 
caloric intake was increased gradually. There were also daily individual therapy 
sessions in which a staff psychologist explored with Joan how she felt about 
herself. 

At first, hospitalization was difficult for Joan. The amount of food that she 
was required to eat for breakfast (two pancakes, a bowl of cereal, a glass of milk, 
one piece of fruit, and a piece of toast) would previously have lasted her for sev¬ 
eral days. She was initially rebellious, refusing to eat or giving her food away 
to other patients. She didn’t earn any privileges in the first 10 days of her hos¬ 
pital stay. Unaccustomed to eating, she experienced severe constipation, bloat¬ 
ing, and indigestion. At times she tried to vomit to get rid of the food, but she 
was not successful. She eventually accepted the fact that she had no choice and 
allowed herself to gain 15 pounds. She felt stronger physically but was still trou¬ 
bled. Joan convinced herself that she would lose that weight as soon as she was 
released from the hospital. 

An important turning point in her attitude came during the third week of 
treatment when Joan received a pass to go home. Outside the hospital, she felt 
out of control, as if she were too weak to take care of herself. She asked Mitch to 
take her back to the hospital immediately. Safely back in her hospital room, she 




Chapter 15 Eating Disorder: Anorexia Nervosa 227 


cried and felt as though she would never get better. This wrenching experience 
helped Joan recognize that she would, indeed, need to change her eating behav¬ 
ior as well as her attitudes regarding weight control and physical appearance. 
Somehow at the end of 30 days, Joan found the strength to leave the hospital. 
She was frightened at first, but with support from Mitch and her family, she was 
able to maintain a normal pattern of eating. She remained in therapy for 6 more 
months and was able to gain another 15 pounds. 

While she was in the hospital, Joan learned that her own attitudes about 
eating and her body were the principal problem, and she had become her own 
worst enemy. She learned that she could control her weight without becom¬ 
ing extremely restrictive in her eating. She began to feel differently about her¬ 
self and food. Joan could not pinpoint exactly what had happened, but she had 
become a different person who was no longer preoccupied with dieting and 
weight control. 

Discussion 


Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa (discussed in the next chapter) are 
the two principal eating disorders described in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR; APA, 2000). Anorexia nervosa is a 
condition characterized by extreme weight loss. Ninety to ninety-five percent 
of anorexics are female. Lifetime prevalence rates for white women range from 
1.4 to 2% (Wade, Bergin, Tiggemann, Bulik, & Fairburn, 2006). Over time, 
about half of people with anorexia stop having any symptoms, and another 25% 
are improved. However, the course of the disorder can be chronic, and 5% of 
patients with anorexia starve to death (Steinhausen, 2002). Deaths also occur 
from physical complications of the illness and from suicide. Careful medical 
supervision of weight gain for severely malnourished patients is necessary to 
prevent refeeding syndrome, another cause of death and other serious compli¬ 
cations, caused by too-rapid changes in phosphorus and electrolyte levels when 
food is reintroduced (Katzman, 2005). Complications such as osteoporosis, ane¬ 
mia, and compromised immune function are common (Misra et al., 2004). The 
DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, p. 589) diagnostic criteria are as follows: 

1. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for 
age and height (e.g., weight loss leading to maintenance of body weight less 
than 85% of that expected; or failure to make expected weight gain during a 
period of growth, leading to body weight less than 85% of that expected). 

2. Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, even though underweight. 

3. Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced, 
undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or denial of the 
seriousness of the current low body weight. 

4 . In postmenarcheal females, amenorrhea, that is, the absence of at least three 
consecutive menstrual cycles. 




228 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


The DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) specifies two types of anorexia nervosa. 
Individuals are considered to be the restricting type if during the episode of ano¬ 
rexia nervosa, they do not regularly engage in eating binges or purge themselves 
of the food they have eaten during a binge (whether through vomiting or laxative 
misuse). The binge-eating/purging type , which is consistent with Joan’s behavior, 
involves the regular occurrence of binge eating or purging behavior during the 
episode of anorexia. This approach to subclassification of eating disorders recog¬ 
nizes the frequent appearance of overlapping symptoms. Approximately one-half 
of patients with anorexia also have bulimic symptoms, and roughly one-third of 
patients with bulimia have a history of anorexia. When patients are followed over a 
period of several years, many people who originally fit the description for restrict¬ 
ing type have changed over to the binge-eating/purging type (Eddy et ah, 2002). 
About half of those with an eating disorder do not clearly fit into one or the other 
category, and are given a diagnosis of eating disorder, not otherwise specified 
(Thomas, Vartanian, & Brownell, 2009), leading some to recommend the relaxing 
of diagnostic criteria to include those who do not have the symptoms of amenor¬ 
rhea or fear of fat. 

Research has revealed some important differences between the two subtypes 
of anorexia nervosa. Anorexics who also binge and purge tend to have weighed 
more before their illness, are more sexually experienced, are more outgoing, 
tend to have less impulse control, are more likely to abuse drugs or steal, and 
have more variable moods than restrictors (Casper & Troiani, 2001). The pres¬ 
ence of bingeing and purging is also thought to be a sign of greater psychologi¬ 
cal disturbance and an indication of a poorer prognosis (Van der Ham, 1997). 

Anorexia nervosa is often comorbid with several other disorders, includ¬ 
ing substance abuse, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), several personal¬ 
ity disorders, and especially with major depression (O’Brien & Vincent, 2003). 
Relatives of patients with anorexia are more likely to have mood disorders. 
People with the bingeing-purging subtype of anorexia nervosa are more likely 
to have personality disorders, especially borderline personality disorder (Jordan 
et al., 2008). Comorbid disorders may not be as common among anorexics who 
do not seek treatment, so studies may have overestimated comorbidity because they 
have often relied on clinical samples (Perkins, Klump, Iacono, & McGue, 2005). 

Patients with anorexia are often characterized as being obsessional, conform¬ 
ing, and emotionally reserved. The research evidence supports this impression but 
also indicates that many different personality styles are found (Thornton & Russell, 
1997). Many researchers and clinicians have described perfectionism as common 
among people with anorexia (Franco-Paredes, Mancilla-Dfaz, Vazquez-Arevalo, 
Lopez-Aguilar, & Alvarez-Rayon, 2005). A frequent feature of anorexia is overac¬ 
tivity. Patients are often restless, fidgety, and engage in excessive exercise (Klein & 
Walsh, 2004). 

Joan met the diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging 
type. She experienced a drastic, self-induced loss of weight; was intensely afraid 
of becoming fat; could not recognize the true size of her body or the seriousness 



Chapter 15 Eating Disorder: Anorexia Nervosa 229 


of her condition; and was no longer menstruating. In addition to her severe 
restriction of food intake, Joan would also periodically eat large amounts of food 
and then try to rid herself of the unwanted calories through vomiting and laxa¬ 
tives. She also experienced many of the physical and psychological side effects 
that accompany starvation, such as constipation, hypotension, skin changes, 
bloating, abdominal pains, dehydration, and lanugo (downy hair growth). 

It is important to recognize that some of the psychological symptoms 
of anorexia nervosa are produced by the lack of food and are not necessarily 
inherent aspects of the anorexic’s personality. For example, people who are 
starving become preoccupied with food and eating. Like Joan, they will often 
cook for others, read recipe books, and may even develop peculiar food rituals. 
While people with anorexia nervosa may become preoccupied with interacting 
with food, they lose their motivational orientation toward eating it (Veenstra & 
de Jong, 2011). This lack of desire to approach and consume food is what ena¬ 
bles them to so severely restrict their food intake. Obsessive behaviors, such as 
hoarding, may also appear. There is often an exaggeration of previous personal¬ 
ity traits, such as increased irritability, avoidance and social withdrawal, and a 
narrowing of interests (Kaye, Strober, & Rhodes, 2002). 

Etiological Considerations 

Biological factors have been considered in the search for the causes of anorexia 
nervosa. It seems likely that biological factors—including hormones and neu¬ 
rotransmitters that regulate metabolism and mediate perceptions of satiety—are 
involved in the etiology of anorexia nervosa. The exact factors and their role in 
the disorder have not been determined (Ferguson & Pigott, 2000). But there is 
compelling evidence that genetic factors are implicated in disordered eating. 
Both evidence from twin studies and an adoption study consistently show mod¬ 
erate rates of heritability for disordered eating, with genetic factors explaining 
59 to 82% of the variance (Klump, Suisman, Burt, McGue, & Iacono, 2009). 
Environmental influences may lead to eating disorders by interacting with the 
genetic risk. Having a family member with anorexia increases one’s risk of hav¬ 
ing the disorder tenfold; genes regulating the serotonergic systems have been 
implicated (Treasure, 2007). More work needs to be done to describe how the 
gene differences translate into the disorder. 

Because anorexia nervosa typically begins during adolescence, some theo¬ 
ries frame it as maturational problems that are sparked by the physical, emo¬ 
tional, and cognitive changes that occur at this time. Some clinicians view 
anorexia as the product of resistance to sexual and psychological maturity, 
or more broadly as trouble with individuation and separation from the fam¬ 
ily (Shoebridge & Gowers, 2000). Noting differences in interactions in fami¬ 
lies with an anorexic child, many have speculated that family factors cause the 
eating disorder, but these characteristics may be a response to having a child 
with a severe eating disorder rather than a reason for the original onset of the 



230 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


child’s disorder. Decades of research have failed to show family factors playing 
a primary causal role, but these speculations still have influence, prompting the 
Academy for Eating Disorders to issue a position paper stating that family fac¬ 
tors play no or a small causal role (Le Grange, Lock, Loeb, & Nicholls, 2010), 
and cautioning against blaming the family for the disorder. Joan’s case was 
atypical, in the sense that her eating problems appeared when she was 29 years 
old. After her brother’s death, her parents became overly protective. When she 
moved home after her divorce, she felt as if she were a child again. Joan’s par¬ 
ents conscientiously provided for her needs, but by not allowing her to work, 
they may have contributed to her feelings of ineffectiveness and inadequacy. 

People with anorexia nervosa have often had childhoods character¬ 
ized by social discomfort, anxiety, and insecure attachments to others (Zucker 
et ah, 2007). As adults, they are more likely to report no significant attach¬ 
ments to others, and as mothers, they are more likely to have difficulty reading 
the interpersonal cues of their infants. When in treatment, they have more dif¬ 
ficulty developing relationships with the treating clinicians. These problems all 
may stem from a subtype of the disorder that includes deficits in social cogni¬ 
tion, which may also lead to risk for suicide, as people with the disorder have a 
57-fold increase in suicide rate, which is more common among people who feel 
isolated. These deficits in social cognition may predispose the person to develop¬ 
ing the eating disorder. 

Cultural attitudes and standards are also thought to play an important role in 
the development of anorexia nervosa (Bordo, 1997; Simpson, 2002). Culture has 
a strong influence on standards for what is considered to be the ideal female 
shape. In Western society, for example, the feminine ideal has shifted from the 
buxom figure of the early 1900s, to the thin flapper of the 1920s, to the hourglass 
shape of the 1950s, and more recently, back to a thin body shape. In this culture, 
thinness is perceived as the standard of beauty as well as an indicator of success 
and self-control. 

At the same time that contemporary cultural standards have emphasized thin¬ 
ness, women’s body weight has been increasing as a result of improved health 
and nutrition. These circumstances have created a conflict between the ideal 
shape and many women’s actual shape. The conflict often leads to prolonged or 
obsessive dieting, which can be a prelude to the development of anorexia nervosa 
(Hsu, 1996). About 12% of adolescent girls have some form of eating pathology 
(Stice, Marti, Shaw, & Jaconis, 2009). As predicted by this line of reasoning, the 
prevalence of anorexia nervosa has increased as the thin feminine ideal took hold, 
and the prevalence of anorexia nervosa is especially high among women who are 
under intense pressure to be thin, such as dancers and models. 

Of course, not all dieting develops into an eating disorder. The evidence 
specifically linking media exposure to body dissatisfaction is contradictory and 
at best shows modest effects; there is more evidence that peer pressure impacts 
body dissatisfaction, perhaps due to female competition for potential mates 
(Ferguson, Winegard, & Winegard, 2011). It is hypothesized that sociocultural 



Chapter 15 Eating Disorder: Anorexia Nervosa 231 


pressures are part of a larger model of development, which includes other 
predisposing factors such as problems with autonomy, rapid physical change at 
puberty, premorbid obesity, personality traits, cognitive style, perceptual distur¬ 
bances, and interpersonal and familial difficulties (Polivy & Herman, 2002). 

The role of sexuality in the development of anorexia is not clear (Ghizzani 
& Montomoli, 2000). Although some experienced clinicians have described the 
disorder as a retreat from maturity, sexual issues are not necessarily the central 
problem. Rather, the patient with anorexia may be focused more specifically on 
achieving control of her body and diet. Attempts to examine a possible causal con¬ 
nection between sexual behavior and eating disorders is also made more compli¬ 
cated by the need to consider additional variables, such as personality traits and 
negative body image. For some women, sexual abuse is an important factor in the 
development of an eating disorder. Nevertheless, there does not appear to be a spe¬ 
cific relation between eating disorders and exposure to sexual trauma (Wonderlich, 
Brewerton, Jocic, & Dunsky, 1997). It has been estimated that 30% of women 
with eating disorders were sexually abused as children, but it seems to be a more 
important risk factor for bulimia nervosa than for anorexia nervosa (Jacobi, 
Hayward, de Zwaan, Kraemer, & Agras, 2004). Sexual abuse does not explain the 
development of most cases of anorexia nervosa, but it is one important risk factor 
for eating disorders and other forms of psychological disturbance. 

The adapted to flee famine hypothesis proposes that anorexia nervosa symp¬ 
toms are an adaptive mechanism that evolved to protect our ancestors from star¬ 
vation in famine conditions (Guisinger, 2003). This mechanism would occur 
when body weight became too low (which now would be due to a diet rather 
than famine) and only among certain individuals with the genes for it, and would 
then trigger restlessness, energy, and cognitive distortions about the emaciated 
state of one’s body to enable the starving individual to have both the courage 
and energy to travel to new locations where food might be more plentiful. This 
hypothesis could explain the persistent denial of the eating disorder that is a 
common feature of anorexic patients, a phenomenon that can be hard for clini¬ 
cians to understand and to overcome (Gatward, 2007). More research is needed 
to evaluate this interesting hypothesis. 

Treatment 

Treating anorexia nervosa is extremely difficult. Research has not identified one 
form of treatment that is consistently more effective than others for all ages. 
Much more research is needed. Various forms of psychotherapy are employed by 
clinicians, with most using cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) or a combination 
of cognitive-behavioral and psychodynamic techniques (Peterson & Mitchell, 
1999). However, none of these treatments has been conclusively shown to be 
effective in treating anorexia nervosa (Fairburn, 2005). The most effective form 
of treatment is family therapy for adolescents with a short history of the disorder 
(Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). 



232 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


A number of steps are typically followed in the treatment of anorexia 
nervosa. The first step is often hospitalization. This may be necessary in cases 
in which weight loss is extreme, suicidal thoughts are present, the patient is 
still denying her illness, or previous outpatient therapy has been ineffective 
(Andersen, 1997). Weight restoration is necessary, both to alleviate the symp¬ 
toms of starvation and to confront the patient with the body size that she fears. 
Although there is no single best way to restore weight, the key is to elicit as 
much cooperation as possible and to be sensitive to the patient’s concerns. 
It is important to work with the patient to set a target weight, usually 90% of 
the average weight for a particular age and height. Behavioral techniques, such 
as those used with Joan, are often used to facilitate immediate weight gain. 
Although inpatient hospitalization seems warranted, there is no research evi¬ 
dence to show that it is more effective than outpatient treatment (Fairbum, 
2005). 

Various medications are used to treat patients with eating disorders, 
especially antidepressants, because anorexic and bulimic patients are often 
depressed. However, studies have not shown them to be any more effective than 
placebo for anorexia nervosa (Wilson et al., 2007). 

Dysfunctional attitudes toward food and body shape are addressed in psy¬ 
chotherapy. This aspect of treatment can be especially challenging because 
patients with anorexia are usually not self-referred, and most are resistant to 
treatment. Establishing a connection with the patient and building a therapeutic 
relationship are particularly important in working with severe cases of anorexia 
nervosa (Strober, 1997). The therapist’s goal is to build a trusting relationship 
within which other interventions can be employed. Cognitive distortions, super¬ 
stitious thinking, trouble with expressing emotion, body-image misperceptions, 
self-esteem, and autonomy are some of the issues that need to be addressed 
(Cooper, Todd, & Wells, 2002). 

Joan’s treatment followed parts of this approach. During her hospitaliza¬ 
tion, various behavioral techniques were used to restore her weight to a healthy 
level. Because Joan was older and living on her own, she was treated individu¬ 
ally, rather than in family therapy. Consistent with a cognitive approach, Joan’s 
ways of viewing the world and herself were challenged directly. Cognitive ther¬ 
apy involves several steps: (a) learning to be more aware of thoughts and beliefs; 
(b) exploring and clarifying the connection between the dysfunctional beliefs 
and maladaptive behaviors; (c) examining the truth of those beliefs; (d) learning 
to replace the dysfunctional beliefs with more realistic ones; and (e) eventually 
changing the underlying assumptions that are creating the dysfunctional beliefs 
(Kleiheld, Wagner, & Halmi, 1996). 

The prognosis for patients with anorexia nervosa is mixed. Approximately 
50% relapse after hospitalization. Five percent die as a direct result of the bio¬ 
logical effects of self-imposed starvation. Those who have a relatively good 
outcome often continue to have difficulties with attitudes toward weight and 
eating (Eckert, Halmi, Marchi, Grove, & Crosby, 1995). Some people are able 



Chapter 15 Eating Disorder: Anorexia Nervosa 233 


to recover without professional intervention, but usually this involves the sup¬ 
port, encouragement, empathy, and practical help of a parent or close friend 
(Woods, 2004). One long-term follow-up study of women who had recovered 
from anorexia investigated the subjective experience of this process. The women 
were interviewed 20 years after the onset of their disorder. They reported that 
“personality strength,” “self-confidence,” and “being understood” were the most 
important factors in their sustained health (Hsu, Crisp, & Callender, 1992). Joan 
had some of these factors working in her favor. She was fortunate to have Mitch 
and close friends as sources of support. She may have also had the advantage of 
psychological maturity because she was already an adult when she developed 
her eating disorder. Although she was initially resistant to treatment, she decided 
to admit herself to the hospital and was determined to change her behavior. 
These factors may have played an important role in her eventual recovery. 


Discussion Questions 


1. What special challenges does anorexia nervosa pose for family relationships? 
How does it affect patients in their roles as children, spouses, and parents? 

2. What does anorexia nervosa have in common with substance-abuse disorders? 

3. A lot of research has focused on the role of the media and standards of beauty 
and the thin ideal in the etiology of anorexia nervosa. Do you think these fac¬ 
tors are improving or worsening? Is there more or less pressure on adolescent 
girls and young adult women today to be thin? What about pressures for 
attractiveness on adolescent boys and young men? 

4 . No treatments have consistently been shown effective with adults with ano¬ 
rexia nervosa. If you were a psychologist treating a college student with the 
disorder, what treatment approach would you use? Why? 




CHAPTER 16 


Eating Disorder: 
Bulimia Nervosa 


Tracy was a 22-year-old junior in college when she was referred to the group 
therapy program for people with eating disorders. She had entered individual 
psychotherapy at the student health center 3 months earlier, hoping that her 
therapist could help her deal more successfully with the stress of university 
life. Their sessions had focused on the development of better study skills and 
on issues surrounding Tracy’s low self-esteem. Although she was very bright 
and had managed to earn a 3.2 grade point average, Tracy’s academic perform¬ 
ance was slipping. Planning and organization were not among her strengths. 
She attended classes only sporadically and regularly found herself staying up all 
night to finish writing papers or to prepare for tests. 

Her depressed mood and pattern of increasing social isolation were also a 
source of some concern, perhaps more to her therapist than to Tracy. She lived 
by herself in an apartment near the campus. Relatively few activities gave her 
any pleasure. She had developed a small circle of both male and female friends 
during her 2 years at the university. She had gone out with several different men 
but had not been involved in a serious romantic relationship for almost 3 years. 
Her feelings about these dating experiences were largely ambivalent. Occasional 
casual sexual encounters were more a source of puzzlement than pleasure for 
her. She couldn’t understand why these men found her attractive. Further discus¬ 
sion of this issue revealed Tracy’s pervasive concerns about her appearance and 
her strong, negative feelings about her body. She told the therapist that she had 
tried to lose weight for several years. It eventually became apparent that Tracy 
had a serious eating disorder. After several extended conversations with her ther¬ 
apist, she finally agreed to join an eating disorders group while she continued 
her individual psychotherapy sessions. 

During her first meeting with the woman who ran the therapy group, Tracy 
was obviously self-conscious and embarrassed while describing the nature of her 
eating problems. She was a reserved, attractive young woman, dressed neatly in 


234 



Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 235 


casual clothes. Her graceful, athletic build (5'6" tall and 135 pounds) gave the 
impression of a person who might be more comfortable with her body than 
she actually was. Her muscular hips and thighs were especially upsetting to 
her. She thought they were ugly and said that she very much wanted to lose 
15 pounds. Tracy reluctantly provided more complete descriptions of her prob¬ 
lems with food as the conversation continued. For the past 2 years, she had been 
going on private eating binges in which she consumed very large quantities of 
food and then forced herself to throw up. These episodes currently happened 
three to four times per week. At its worst, this binge/purge cycle had occurred 8 
to 10 times per week. 

Tracy took four to six diet pills each day in a largely unsuccessful effort 
to control her appetite. She hoped that the pills would prevent her binge eating, 
but they did not. She also took laxatives on a regular basis, usually once a day. 
This practice was based on her erroneous assumption that the laxatives would 
decrease her body’s absorption of food. Taking the laxatives made Tracy feel 
that she was somehow losing most of the food that she consumed. 

Tracy’s notion of an appropriate diet bordered on the concept of starvation. 
She tried not to eat all day long. After skipping breakfast and lunch, she would 
invariably experience intense hunger pains during the afternoon. Not trusting 
these signals from her body, she would manage to fight them throughout the rest 
of the day. Tracy usually returned to her apartment around 7 or 8 o’clock at night 
after a hectic day of classes, meetings, and work. By that point, she would be 
starving. That was the point at which her binges were most likely to occur. 

A typical binge would begin with a trip to the nearby grocery store. Tracy 
would buy a whole chicken and take it home to prepare. The process usually 
began with a glass of wine, which made her feel more relaxed (particularly on an 
empty stomach). As she sipped her wine, Tracy would bake the chicken and pre¬ 
pare a large batch of stuffing and mashed potatoes—almost like a Thanksgiving 
dinner. Then she would order two large sausage pizzas to be delivered from a 
local restaurant. While she was waiting for the chicken to bake and the pizzas to 
be delivered, she would eat cookies and potato chips while finishing her bottle of 
wine. Whenever she started to feel full, she would go in the bathroom and make 
herself throw up. This lengthy process of eating and regurgitation would con¬ 
tinue until all the food was consumed. 

Tracy felt helpless and out of control during these binges, which often lasted 
2 and sometimes as much as 3 hours. After the process started, it seemed to 
demand completion. Tracy seldom ate sitting at a table. She ate quickly, pacing 
about her apartment. At times she felt as if she were outside her body, watching 
the process unfold. She usually took the phone off the hook so that she wouldn’t 
be interrupted by calls from any of the few friends she still had. 

After purging, her mood would go from bad to worse. Tracy felt awful 
about herself, particularly at these moments. Her stomach hurt, but physical 
pain was not as debilitating as the psychological consequences of the episode. 
She invariably felt disgusted by her own behavior and deeply ashamed of her 



236 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


complete inability to control her binge eating. She felt guilty both because she 
had eaten so much and also because she didn’t have the control that others had. 
Tracy had read extensively about anorexia nervosa and now told her therapist 
that she envied the control that those women had over their appetites. If only she 
could do that! 

She began to experience several harmful physical effects from the repeated 
vomiting. Her dentist noticed that the enamel had begun to erode on the inner 
surface of her front teeth. He had asked Tracy about the pattern at her last 
checkup. She denied any eating problems, but the concern that she detected in 
his voice left her feeling even more unsettled about her problem. The skin over 
the knuckles on her right hand was now scarred; she put those fingers down her 
throat to stimulate the gag reflex when she wanted to throw up. She knew that 
her throat was beginning to suffer, as indicated by recurrent hoarseness and sore 
throats. Perhaps most alarming was the fact that she had begun throwing up 
blood on occasion, a sign that the walls of her esophagus were tearing. 

The wine that Tracy consumed at the outset of her binges was also a source 
of some considerable concern and reflected a drinking problem that intensi¬ 
fied and complicated her eating disorder. Tracy found it annoying that some 
of her friends had begun to criticize her drinking, but she privately shared the 
feeling that she ought to cut back. She often drank heavily when she went out 
socially with other people, and she sometimes engaged in casual sexual rela¬ 
tions that contributed to her already ample feelings of guilt, confusion, and lack 
of control. This aspect of her interpersonal relationships seemed particularly 
self-destructive. 


Social History 


Tracy’s parents were divorced when she was 2 years old. Their separation was 
messy and painful for everyone. Her father had been awarded custody of Tracy 
because of her mother’s substance-use problems and because she had abandoned 
the family to live with her boyfriend. That relationship didn’t last much longer 
than the divorce proceedings, but her mother did eventually remarry and had two 
additional children, a girl and a boy. 

Tracy grew up living with her father, who provided her with a comfortable 
home. Unfortunately, he was so preoccupied with his job that he spent little time 
with her. While she was in elementary school, she was supervised by a house¬ 
keeper who lived with Tracy and her father. This woman was fond of Tracy but 
was also rather rigid and aloof. Tracy spent most of her time alone when she 
returned home after school. She watched TV and played games until her father 
got home from work at 8 or 9 o’clock. She looked forward to his arrival because 
that was when he would spend time with her. Unfortunately, he didn't show 
much interest in her life. They would fix a meal of frozen dinners, snacks, and 
desserts, and then sit down and watch TV together. 




Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 237 


When Tracy was 13 years old, her mother—who was now 36—suddenly 
reappeared. She and her second family had moved back to the city in which 
Tracy lived. She wanted to spend time with Tracy and become friends with 
her. Tracy’s father was understandably opposed to this idea, but the original 
divorce agreement had stipulated that Tracy could see her mother on week¬ 
ends. That agreement was still in effect, even though her mother had never 
before followed through on the plan. In fact, Tracy had always been curious 
about her mom and was now anxious to meet her. They agreed to meet for 
lunch on a couple of occasions. 

Tracy was initially struck by her mother’s stunning appearance. She was 
beautiful—still very thin and exquisitely dressed. Tracy was charmed by 
her mother’s warm and friendly manner as well as her physical appearance. 
Her mother was intrigued by Tracy’s interests, her accomplishments, and her 
friends. This concern was a welcome change from the indifference that 
her father had always shown her. Tracy and her mother began to spend more 
time together on weekends and holidays. She admired her mother. It was fun 
to have a mom who would take her out to lunch and dote on her. As they got to 
know each other better, however, Tracy’s mother became more intrusive and 
critical of Tracy’s behavior and appearance. She began to tell Tracy that it 
wouldn't hurt for her to lose a few pounds. Tracy’s younger half-sister was also 
very thin, like their mother. She and Tracy soon found themselves competing 
for their mother’s attention. 

Like most other teenagers, Tracy was self-conscious about her body and 
the changes that she was going through at this time. Whatever doubts she 
already had about her own figure and appearance were seriously exacerbated by 
these competitive interactions with her mother and half-sister. Tracy was built 
more like her father—muscular and stocky. At her mother’s suggestion, Tracy 
started to experiment with various kinds of diets. Her mother recommended a 
sequence of diets that had worked for her. Unfortunately, nothing worked for 
very long when Tracy tried it. If she did manage to lose 10 pounds, she would 
gain it back within 3 months. Her weight fluctuated for the next few years 
between 120 and 145 pounds. 

Tracy eventually found herself spending time moving back and forth 
between her mother’s and father’s homes. Her patterns of eating became even 
more inconsistent, perhaps largely because there were different ways to eat in 
these different places. Her dad lived on packaged cereal, snack food, and late, 
precooked dinners. Her mom’s family ate carefully prepared, nutritious meals 
that emphasized low-fat foods, including lots of fruits and vegetables. The lat¬ 
ter pattern was obviously more healthy, but the atmosphere at these meals fre¬ 
quently made Tracy uncomfortable. Her half-sister seemed to be able to eat more 
than Tracy without gaining weight. Her half-sister and stepfather were always 
given bigger servings than Tracy, as her mother reminded her to watch what she 
ate. Whenever Tracy expressed an interest in having a light dessert, her mother 
would smile at her and ask, “Do you really think you should do that?” For 



238 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


obvious reasons, Tracy experienced a lot of negative emotional responses—guilt, 
shame, and anger—when she ate with her mother’s family. 

Like many of her peers, Tracy was rebellious as a teenager. Her father 
was lenient with her as she entered adolescence, allowing her to run with a 
crowd of wild boys and girls. Her friends were unconventional and viewed 
themselves as outsiders in their high school. Their group drank alcohol and 
smoked marijuana regularly, beginning in their early teens. Her father’s house 
was occasionally the site for these gatherings because he was seldom around 
to supervise. After smoking marijuana, Tracy and her friends would get “the 
munchies” and consume large quantities of snacks and desserts (such as chips 
and cookies, which were in abundant supply at her father’s house). This pat¬ 
tern of sporadic binge eating subverted more than one of her diet plans. Her 
weight increased noticeably. 

Although some of her friends skipped classes and used drugs at school, 
Tracy did not. She didn’t study very much, but she was smart enough to be a 
good student. She did feel that she was subjected to unfair criticism and scrutiny 
from teachers and administrators because of her friends. Her academic talents 
were underdeveloped as she became more alienated from the school. 

Tracy found her first serious boyfriend at age 16. She fell head-over-heels 
in love with Jerome, who was 21 years old and working as a clerk at the video 
store where Tracy and her friends rented movies and games. Their relationship 
quickly became sexual, which was both exciting and anxiety provoking for 
Tracy, who had not had any previous sexual experience. When Tracy’s father 
found out that she was dating Jerome, he became angry. He told her mother, and 
soon everyone was embroiled in the conflict over this new romance. Tracy felt 
increasingly alienated from both of her parents and from her friends, who some¬ 
what paradoxically shared her parents’ concern about her choice of boyfriends. 

When Tracy was 17 years old, she dropped out of high school in her senior 
year and moved to southern California to be with Jerome. He had moved there 
3 months before she decided to go. Their romance had actually faded in recent 
months. Her decision to leave was perhaps more motivated by the desire to avoid 
high school and her family than by her feelings for Jerome. After she arrived 
in California, Tracy realized that he no longer cared for her. She started to feel 
depressed when it became apparent that Jerome did not want to spend much 
time with her. She realized that she now had no family, no friends, and no job. 
One night, after she had spent an entire day sitting alone in their small apart¬ 
ment, Tracy told Jerome that she felt like she might be better off dead. His only 
response was to say, “If that’s how you feel, go ahead and kill yourself.” 

Tracy’s binge eating and purging evolved gradually while she was living 
with Jerome in California. As she became more seriously depressed, she often 
ate snack foods to make herself feel better. Within 2 months, she had gained 
eight more pounds. Renewed concern about her appearance and guilt about her 
inability to control her snacking caused a further decline in her mood. In an 
attempt to lose the new weight, Tracy went back to some of her earlier diets. 



Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 239 


Nothing seemed to work. Increased efforts to control what she ate seemed to 
produce a paradoxical increase in her consumption of food. One day, after eating 
two large bags of pretzels, Tracy began to feel nauseated. Rather than waiting to 
find out whether she would vomit spontaneously, she decided to go to the bath¬ 
room and stick her fingers down her throat. The process itself was upsetting, 
but she felt much better after it was over. Then it dawned on her: Maybe self- 
induced vomiting was a way to avoid gaining weight. It was easy to do. Because 
she didn’t have a job, she was usually alone with plenty of time and privacy. She 
couldn’t control what she ate, but she could be sure that it didn’t sit on her stom¬ 
ach. At first, she only threw up once or twice a week. The frequency progressed 
slowly over the next year. 

Three months after she had moved to California, Tracy returned to live with 
her father. It was difficult to admit that she had made a mistake, but she was 
shocked by Jerome’s lack of concern for her feelings and disgusted by the dis¬ 
mal quality of their relationship. She returned in a better mood than when she 
left. Her decision to leave Jerome had given her new energy and confidence. 
She got a part-time job and went back to high school classes at night. She was 
able to earn her high school equivalency degree and went on to school at a local 
community college. From there, she transferred to the university. 

Unfortunately, Tracy also returned home in the early stages of an expand¬ 
ing eating disorder. She was already starting to experience some physical conse¬ 
quences from throwing up repeatedly. She had severe stomach pains. One of her 
friends commented on the fact that she frequently had very bad breath. As 
her secret problem escalated, she became more embarrassed and ashamed. 

Although she had managed to pass all her classes since entering the uni¬ 
versity, Tracy knew that she was falling behind. She was taking courses in the 
School of Commerce, which was a very demanding curriculum. Pressure from 
assignments was becoming overwhelming. Her feelings of depression were 
beginning to return. Tracy’s father suggested to her that she might find it use¬ 
ful to see a psychologist at the student health center, in the hope that psycho¬ 
therapy would help her cope with stress. She was not enthusiastic about going 
to see a psychologist, and she wasn’t willing to acknowledge the severity of 
her eating problems. When Tracy did finally make an appointment with a psy¬ 
chologist, she said that she wanted to develop her study skills. Her goal was 
presumably to become a more effective student. She spent several weeks in 
treatment before she and her therapist eventually recognized the nature of her 
eating disorder. 

Conceptualization and Treatment 


Tracy’s individual therapist referred her to a group for people suffering from 
bulimia nervosa. The group was based on a cognitive-behavioral approach to 
treatment outlined by Fairburn (1995) in his book. Overcoming Binge Eating. 




240 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


The book provides a useful summary of information about the disorder and can 
also serve as a self-help manual for those people who are able to change without 
entering professional treatment. This is an important option because the secre¬ 
tive nature of this problem causes many people to be reluctant to seek help. The 
short-term approach represents a blend of cognitive procedures that were orig¬ 
inally used to treat depression and behavioral approaches for the treatment of 
obesity. The cognitive elements of the program are aimed at factors such as low 
self-esteem and extreme concern about body size and shape. The behavioral ele¬ 
ments are designed to alter maladaptive patterns of eating. 

The group included Tracy and four other women who also suffered from 
bulimia. Led by a clinical psychologist who specialized in the treatment of eat¬ 
ing disorders, they met once a week for 10 weeks and followed a prearranged 
sequence of topics. 

Week 1: Self-Monitoring 

The psychologist began their first session by acknowledging the difficulty 
that they all must have had in deciding to participate in this process. Up to this 
point, the most common reaction that they had all had from friends and family 
members involved accusations of weakness and provocation of guilt. Most had 
been asked over and over again, "Why can’t you just stop?” as if it were actually 
that simple. This group would be a place where they could all share their feel¬ 
ings with people who understood clearly why they couldn't stop. 

The first step of the program involved self-monitoring. Participants were 
asked to keep a careful, daily record of everything they ate or drank. The record 
included information about binge eating and purging. This information would be 
used as a baseline against which subsequent progress could be measured. The 
instructions were to keep a careful record but not to change anything about her 
eating. The psychologist also asked each woman to begin weighing herself once 
a week (and no more than once a week). 

Tracy was more reserved than the other group members during this first ses¬ 
sion. She had trouble connecting to the other women. The others felt good about 
being in the group, but Tracy did not. She said that she did want to stop binge 
eating and purging, but she also insisted that she still needed to lose 5 pounds 
before she would be happy with her body. 

Week 2: Cues and Consequences 

During the second session, group members discussed their self-monitoring 
records from the preceding week. Did they notice any situations or foods 
that regularly triggered their binges? Most found it relatively easy and help¬ 
ful to share their experiences with the group. One woman said that, if she ate 
one french fry, she would say to herself, “Now it’s over.” Another said that her 
binges were set off by fights with her boyfriend. Still another said that her first 



Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 241 


binge of the week happened immediately after she got off the phone with her 
mother, who said something critical to her about her attempt to change her eat¬ 
ing problems (when she really needed reassurance and support). 

Unfortunately, Tracy reported that she had experienced trouble with the 
assignment. She claimed that she was too busy to keep detailed records of her 
eating. In fact, the biggest problem was that she was not comfortable sharing 
descriptions of her binges with the group. She had been struck by the intensity 
of her negative feelings around binge eating. She was also beginning to under¬ 
stand how negatively she thought about herself. 

The psychologist also asked the women to generate a list of other activities 
that could be used to replace binges. They generated many options, includ¬ 
ing calling friends on the phone, going for a walk, reading a book, and doing 
a relaxation exercise. Passive activities would clearly be less effective. For 
example, watching television did not seem like a useful option because many 
said that they usually ate while watching TV. The therapist explained that by 
doing something active in response to an urge to binge, the person is also likely 
to reduce the duration of any strong, negative feelings that are associated. 

For the next week, each woman was encouraged to begin replacing binges 
with a pattern of regular eating throughout each day. This pattern would include 
breakfast, lunch, and dinner as well as a planned snack within 2 or 3 hours after 
each meal. The women were urged not to skip any planned meals or snacks, 
and also not to eat any unplanned foods. This step was discussed at great length 
because it is the most important element in the treatment program. 

Eating on a schedule struck some as being a bad idea. Tracy expressed con¬ 
cern that she should only eat when her body told her that she was hungry. The 
problem with this argument is that hunger signals are often disrupted in people 
who have been involved in binge eating and purging. The therapist explained 
that until they had returned to normal patterns of eating for a substantial period 
of time, it would be better to eat at prearranged times. They were encouraged to 
weigh themselves only once each week. And they were asked to take a leap of 
faith—to let their weight fluctuate to wherever it was supposed to be, given a 
regular pattern of eating. This could mean that their weight would go up or down 
a little bit, even in the first week or two. 

Week 3: Thoughts, Feelings, and Behaviors 

Tracy called the group’s leader before this session to say that she would have 
to miss the meeting because she had a lot of work to do. She apologized and 
explained that school had been especially stressful this week. In truth, she had 
not been doing her self-monitoring and had not been able to begin a regular 
pattern of eating—even at breakfast. She was too embarrassed to tell the other 
group members that her binge eating and purging had continued unabated. Tracy 
was not yet committed to the treatment program. 



242 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Everyone else spent the session talking about distorted patterns of thinking. 
Cognitive therapists assume that if a person is extremely upset, she may not be 
aware that certain thoughts could have produced her negative emotional state. 
For example, the women were asked to suppose that they had just eaten a piece 
of cake that was not on their meal plan. What do you think to yourself? Some 
volunteered that they would say, “Now I just ruined everything. One piece of 
cake is as good as a binge. I hate myself! I screwed up, and now I should just 
finish the binge. I’ll start being ‘good’ again tomorrow.” The goal of this ses¬ 
sion was to help them learn to interrupt the chain that leads from distorted, 
self-deprecating thoughts to negative feelings and then to bingeing and purging 
behavior. 

Week 4: Perfectionism and All-or-Nothing Thinkin g 

At the beginning of the fourth session, the other members of the group asked 
Tracy about her absence from the previous meeting. She tried to tell them that 
she was too busy to attend, but they didn’t buy her excuse. She finally confided 
tearfully, and with great difficulty, that she had become increasingly depressed 
over the past 2 weeks. Frustrated and disappointed with her inability to engage 
with the program, she wondered openly whether she would ever be able to eat 
normally. Tracy confessed that she had stopped monitoring completely and had 
not been able to follow even the simplest elements of regular eating. She was 
engaging in binge eating and purging at least as often as before she entered the 
group. Having disclosed these secrets to the rest of the group, Tracy was over¬ 
whelmed with feelings of shame and guilt. She got up and quietly walked out 
of the room, halfway through the session. She went home to her apartment and 
immediately ordered food to be delivered. While she was waiting for it to arrive, 
she had a glass of wine and wrote in her previously empty self-monitoring jour¬ 
nal about feelings of giving up. 

The other members of the group had mixed reactions to Tracy’s message 
and her early departure. They were all sympathetic, but some also expressed 
disappointment at her lack of commitment to the therapy process. There was 
also a feeling of failure and rejection associated with their own apparent inabil¬ 
ity to make Tracy feel that they could help her succeed in the treatment program. 
These issues were discussed at length before the therapist continued with their 
planned agenda for the week. 

The remaining portion of this session was devoted to a further discus¬ 
sion of personality traits and distorted thinking patterns that are often associ¬ 
ated with binge eating. Examples were, “I need to be thin in order to be liked 
and successful” and “If I eat regular meals, I will turn into a blimp.” Another 
example followed from Tracy’s current distress: “If I don’t succeed in the first 
2 weeks of treatment, it means that I will never be able to change.” Group 
members were asked to discuss a series of questions: Are these thoughts 
really accurate? Do you have to be perfect in everything that you do? And do 



Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 243 


you plan to make yourself miserable unless every aspect of your appearance 
is perfect? 

Week 5: Assertive Behavior 

To some people’s surprise, Tracy appeared on time for the group’s next meeting. 
She was composed and cheerful, in stark contrast to the state in which she had 
fled their last session. Tracy explained that, 2 days after their last session, she 
had an experience that promised to change her entire outlook on her eating disorder. 

The fateful event took place while she was babysitting for a neighbor’s lit¬ 
tle girl. The next day was the girl’s fifth birthday. A party was planned, with 
20 of the little girl’s best friends scheduled to attend. Her mother had ordered a 
special birthday cake and left it in the refrigerator. Tracy hadn’t eaten all day when 
she arrived to babysit. She was starving. As soon as she saw the cake, she knew it 
was going to be a serious problem. The girl talked about the cake all night, tell¬ 
ing Tracy how beautiful it was and what a nice party she was going to have the 
next day. She repeatedly took Tracy to the refrigerator to look at the cake and talk 
about its decorations. Tracy resisted the temptation to eat a piece of the cake for 
2 hours after the little girl went to sleep. Then she completely lost control. Before 
she realized what she was doing, Tracy had eaten the whole cake. Horrified and 
ashamed by what she had done, she quickly found herself in the bathroom. She 
sobbed uncontrollably as she threw up in the toilet. When she finally stood up, 
she was staring directly at her face in the mirror. Tears were streaming down her 
face. Tracy told the group that at that moment she finally acknowledged the reality 
and the severity of her eating problems. Her eating was so far out of control that she 
could devour a child’s birthday cake the day before her party. Tracy knew then that 
she would have to take responsibility for changing her own feelings and behavior. 

Tracy had not binged or purged since that night. She started monitor¬ 
ing what she ate the next morning and had not missed a day. Although she had 
not previously kept written records, the discussions in weeks 1 and 2 had been 
enough to help her recognize that, in her own case, she would have to start eat¬ 
ing regularly throughout the day if she wanted to control her late-night binges. 
She forced herself to eat at least a small breakfast on each of the remaining 
days. She still skipped lunch on most days, but she did eat a regular evening 
meal without escalating into a binge. Her decision to avoid having a glass of 
wine when she arrived home was undoubtedly one important part of that success. 

The group listened to her story with rapt attention. Some cried, knowing 
that they could easily have done the same thing if they found themselves in the 
same situation. They praised her lavishly for the positive changes that she had 
already accomplished. Their sympathetic responses helped Tracy to feel that she 
had finally become part of the group. 

For the remaining time in the session, the group returned to a discus¬ 
sion of the topics that had originally been planned: assertive behavior. This 
issue represents a logical extension of the preceding discussions of negative 



244 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


emotional triggers for binge eating. For some people, anger can be a stimulus 
for uncontrolled eating. By training the women to behave more assertively, the 
psychologist hoped that they would be able to solve interpersonal problems 
more effectively and minimize emotional distress. 

For the first time, Tracy participated actively and constructively in this discus¬ 
sion. The relevance to her own situation was apparent. Throughout adolescence, 
she had been afraid to stand up for herself. She received frequent critical messages 
from her parents, teachers, and peers. For example, her mother’s criticism of her 
appearance and weight had been a common source of irritation and embarrass¬ 
ment. She role-played with the group ways in which she could tell her mother that 
these critical remarks made her feel bad, without becoming rude or hostile. 

Week 6: Body Image 

This session was devoted to a discussion of the women’s images of their own 
bodies. The women had already made it clear to one another that their lives 
were, in many ways, dominated by concerns about their appearance and their 
weight. Some said they believed that unless they found a way to keep themselves 
thin, they would be depressed and lonely for the rest of their lives. 

In an effort to help group members identify and challenge their own negative 
feelings about their bodies, the therapist reviewed a number of facts about physi¬ 
ology. For example, women need a certain amount of body fat to enable repro¬ 
duction. Their bodies need more fat than men’s bodies. Women also have a lower 
resting metabolism rate than men. Dieting suppresses metabolism even further. 

Each member of the group was asked to write down five things about her 
body that she liked. These were not to be aspects of her appearance. Rather, they 
were to list things that their bodies did for them. This became a very challeng¬ 
ing exercise. Tracy was unable to think of a single thing. Others were able to 
generate a few items, such as “My body allows me to run for 30 minutes every 
day. It makes me feel strong.” The difficulty that the women had in constructing 
this particular list helped them realize the extent of the distorted and imbalanced 
views that they had come to hold about their own bodies. 

The session ended with each person reporting her own progress toward the 
introduction of regular patterns of eating. Tracy noted that she was now eating three 
regular meals and two scheduled snacks each day. She had completely eliminated 
her late-night binges. When she experienced an urge to have a glass of wine or bake 
a batch of cookies, she would record the urge in her journal and then distract herself 
by doing “stomach crunches.” The exercise made her feel better about herself, and 
she found that the urge to binge usually passed by the time she was finished. 

Week 7: Dieting and Other Causal Factors 

In the first portion of this session, the group discussed the relation between dif¬ 
ferent types of dieting and the onset of binge eating. Dieting plays a crucial role 



Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 245 


in most cases of bulimia. People who set dietary restraints make themselves feel 
food deprived. When they do eat, they are more likely to binge. 

There are many forms of dieting. The women were instructed to identify 
any food groups that they had been trying to avoid. All said that they avoided 
sweet desserts. Others stayed away from dairy foods, fatty meats, and simple 
carbohydrates. The psychologist told them that they should gradually introduce 
small amounts of each type of food into their planned meals and snacks. This 
process was designed to diminish the probability of further binges by eliminat¬ 
ing extreme forms of dietary restraint. 

The remainder of this session was devoted to a review of information about 
causes of bulimia. Emphasis was placed on the notion that no single factor is 
responsible for all cases of eating disorder. The pathways to bulimia are com¬ 
plex, and the symptoms of the disorder can vary over time. Several family issues 
were discussed, including traumatic events such as deaths, divorce, parental con¬ 
flict, and childhood sexual abuse. 

Week 8: Problem Solving and Stress Reduction 

The women’s self-monitoring records indicated clearly that their binge episodes 
did not occur at random. Rather, their binges were much more likely to occur 
during moments of increased stress. Their next discussion focused on the devel¬ 
opment of problem-solving skills that might then serve to decrease the frequency 
of future binge eating. They began by talking about ways of spotting problems 
before they became unmanageable. Warning signals would include the onset of 
negative mood states (particularly sadness or anger) as well as particular situa¬ 
tions, such as being alone with nothing to do. After recognizing the presence of 
a problem situation, the psychologist worked with them on ways to generate a 
large number of potential solutions to the problem. 

Week 9: Healthy Exercise and Relapse Prevention 

In their next-to-last session, the women worked on two topics that would help 
them maintain progress after the group treatment was completed. First, they 
talked about the benefits of healthy exercise. The women listed several con¬ 
siderations, including stress reduction, mood elevation, social interaction with 
friends, and the regulation of metabolism. The damaging effects of compulsive 
exercise were also discussed. Exercise should be pleasurable, not a punishment 
for overeating. 

The second half of this session was devoted to the prevention of relapse. 
Minor setbacks are virtually inevitable in this type of program. It may be unre¬ 
alistic to assume that, after a person has recovered from binge eating, she will 
never overeat again. The women acknowledged that eating problems might be 
their Achilles’ heel for the rest of their lives. Particularly during stressful times, 
they would still be tempted to binge. How would they react when that happened? 



246 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


They were encouraged to distinguish between temporary lapses and full-blown 
relapses. If they did slip up, it would not mean that they were back where they 
had started before the group. It would simply mean that they should address the 
problem right away and reinstate those aspects of the program that had been 
most successful initially. 

Week 10: Coping with Future Events 

The final session was devoted to a review of earlier steps and a discussion of 
ways that they could reduce their vulnerability to future binge eating. What 
kinds of situations might contribute to their own relapse? One crucial consid¬ 
eration was obviously the continuation of eating regular meals and avoiding all 
forms of dieting. They also discussed methods that they had learned to use when 
coping with stressful events, negative emotions, and self-defeating thoughts. 

By the time the group ended, Tracy had made significant improvements 
with regard to her eating problems. She had eaten regular meals on a daily 
basis for 5 weeks. She had not binged or purged since the traumatic night when 
she ate the birthday cake, and she had stopped taking diet pills and laxatives. 
Somewhat to her surprise, her weight had remained fairly steady for the first 
couple of weeks and then leveled off at 5 pounds less than it had been when 
she entered the group. Her mood was much improved, but she still experienced 
periods of marked sadness and loneliness. Her concerns about drinking as well 
as difficulties in relationships with boyfriends and her parents had not been 
resolved. She continued to discuss these issues with her individual therapist. 

Discussion 


Tracy’s disorder, bulimia nervosa, is one of two eating disorders described in 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR ; APA, 
2000). The other eating disorder is anorexia nervosa: an intense fear of becom¬ 
ing obese resulting in reduced intake of food and severe weight loss. The key 
to the diagnosis of bulimia nervosa is recurrent episodes of binge eating cou¬ 
pled with compensatory behavior, such as vomiting, to prevent weight gain 
(Fairburn & Cooper, 2007). Literally, bulimia means “ox hunger,” or voracious 
appetite, but it now refers to binge eating and purging. Although many people 
report occasional binges, the DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) diagnosis requires at least 
two binges per week for at least 3 months. The binges, which are often triggered 
by stress, typically involve eating high-calorie, easily ingested food in a short 
period of time (e.g., 2 hours) and in secret. During the binges, the person feels 
out of control and may consume 2,000 to 4,000 calories, more than someone 
would usually eat in an entire day. The binges end when the person becomes 
uncomfortably full or when the person is interrupted or falls asleep. Vomiting 
frequently follows the binge, either terminating it or allowing further eating to 




Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 247 


take place. Heavy laxative use and excessive exercise are other ways of trying to 
compensate for the large number of calories consumed. 

People suffering from bulimia are usually intensely concerned about 
their weight and fear becoming fat. They realize that their eating is abnormal 
but report that they cannot control themselves. Their inability to control their 
eating often leads to feelings of depression, guilt, and low self-esteem (Garner & 
Magana, 2002). 

The exact prevalence of bulimia is not known, principally because it is a secre¬ 
tive problem. Approximately 2 to 3% of women and much less than 1% of men 
will qualify for a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa at some point in their lives (Hudson, 
Hiripi, Pope, & Kessler, 2007). The disorder typically begins during late adoles¬ 
cence. Evidence regarding the long-term course of bulimia suggests that many peo¬ 
ple eventually have a good outcome, even though they continue to experience some 
symptoms of the disorder (Wade, Bergin, Tiggemann, Bulik, & Fairburn, 2006). 

Bulimia can occur either by itself, as in Tracy’s case, or as an accompanying 
symptom of anorexia nervosa. About 50% of patients with anorexia also have 
episodes of binge eating. The frequency of binges and vomiting in these patients, 
however, is less than was true for Tracy. Bulimia also is comorbid with several 
other diagnoses, including depression, personality disorders (especially border¬ 
line personality disorder), anxiety disorders, and substance-use disorders (Baker, 
Mazzeo, & Kendler, 2007; O’Brien & Vincent, 2003; van Hanswijck, van Furth, 
Lacey, & Waller, 2003). 

Several serious physical complications may result from bulimia (Mehler, 
2011). Tracy experienced several of these problems, including sore throat, swol¬ 
len salivary glands, and destruction of dental enamel, which occur as a result 
of the frequent presence of stomach acid in these areas. Repeated vomiting can 
also lead to potassium depletion, which, in turn, can produce seizures. Urinary 
infections and kidney failure also occur in some patients. Menstrual irregularity 
is also common. 

Etiological Considerations 

Bulimia nervosa is undoubtedly the product of a complex interaction among 
biological, psychological, and social factors. These include various sorts of 
antecedent conditions and predispositions to the disorder, such as negative self- 
evaluations and fear of gaining weight. In the presence of these vulnerability fac¬ 
tors, the stress of dieting often triggers the full-blown symptoms of the disorder 
and sets off a cascade of related biological reactions (Halmi, 2011; Polivy & 
Herman, 2002). 

Biological Factors 

Supporting the possible importance of genetics, bulimia nervosa clearly runs in 
families. Data from twin studies also show higher concordance for monozygotic 
(MZ) than for dizygotic (DZ) twins (Bulik et ah, 2010; Mazzeo et al., 2010). 



248 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


At a neurochemical level, interest has focused on the neurotransmitter sero¬ 
tonin (Kaye, 2008). Several factors make serotonin an appealing variable to play 
a role in bulimia. First, drugs that block serotonin receptors lead to increased 
food intake and appear to do so by reducing feelings of being satiated after eat¬ 
ing. Patients with bulimia binge, of course, and also report less satiety after 
eating. Second, low levels of serotonin are associated with both depression and 
increased impulsivity. Depression is often found in patients with bulimia, 
and their binge eating could well be regarded as reflecting a high level of 
impulsivity. Studies of serotonin in patients with bulimia provide more direct 
support. Research has found a low level of serotonin in patients with bulimia. 
Furthermore, studies in which patients with bulimia take drugs that affect serot¬ 
onin have found that patients with bulimia show smaller responses than normal, 
again demonstrating the importance of this variable (Ferguson & Pigott, 2000). 

Psychological Factors 

A fear of being fat is a primary feature of the eating disorders, including 
bulimia. This fear is likely to lead to dieting, which is an important precursor 
of bulimia (Austin, 2001; Brewerton, Dansky, Kilpatrick, & O’Neil, 2000). 
Fear of being fat arises from several sources. First, there are sociocultural influ¬ 
ences. Over the past several decades, there has been a steady progression toward 
thinness as the ideal shape, although this trend now seems to have leveled off. 
We know that this ideal has been internalized by large numbers of women 
because many normal-weight women perceive themselves to be overweight. 
At the same time that society was becoming preoccupied with being thin, the 
prevalence of bulimia increased markedly (Floek & van Hoeken, 2003). This 
cultural influence has had a greater impact on women than men and may thus 
account for the gender difference in the prevalence of bulimia. As would be 
expected if cultural effects are important, the frequency of eating disorders is 
particularly high among women, such as gymnasts and dancers, who are under 
extreme pressure to keep their weight down. 

Several other factors also contribute to fear of being fat. For example, being 
overweight or having overweight parents are risk factors for bulimia. Being teased 
by peers or criticized by parents about being overweight can also contribute 
(Cooper, 2005). In Tracy’s case, her mother’s persistent comments about Tracy’s 
weight undoubtedly contributed to her own exaggerated concerns about being 
fat, as well as her low self-esteem. A distorted view of the size of one’s body is 
another risk factor. For example, in one study, women with bulimia were shown 
silhouettes of very thin to very obese women. They were asked to select the one 
closest to their own body size and the one they would most like to be. The women 
with bulimia overestimated their current body size and chose thinner ideal body 
sizes than control women ( Williamson, Cubic, & Gleaves, 1993). 

One psychological explanation for the development of bulimia nervosa sug¬ 
gests that the disorder is a combination of extreme weight concerns and dieting 
practices (Byrne & McLean, 2002; Lowe, Thomas, Safer, & Butryn, 2007). Fear 



Chapter 16 Eating Disorder: Bulimia Nervosa 249 


of becoming fat leads to restricting food intake, which then sets the stage for the 
development of the binge-purge cycle. Dietary restraint paradoxically increases 
the likelihood of binge eating when the person is stressed (Polivy, Herman, & 
Boivin, 2008). Emotional arousal increases eating among people who are trying 
to restrict their food intake. The binge-eating pattern for patients with bulimia is 
similar but more extreme. Dieting frequently precedes the onset of bulimia, and 
it also appears to be triggered by episodes of stress. After the binge, the patient 
with bulimia feels anxious, and the purge is then a way of reducing this anxiety. 

What function did binge eating serve for Tracy? Several processes could be 
involved. First, Tracy was afraid of becoming fat and did often restrain her eat¬ 
ing, for example, by skipping breakfast and lunch. Second, Tracy’s early binges 
seemed, at least in part, to be stress related. Binge eating could have been estab¬ 
lished as a way of coping with stress. Her binges may have filled up a life that 
was devoid of many other pleasurable activities. 

Treatment 

Many patients with eating disorders do not seek treatment for their disor¬ 
der because they do not believe that anything is wrong. Others fail to enter 
therapy because they are ashamed of their condition or feel hopeless about it. 
When patients with bulimia do enter therapy, they are treated with both biologi¬ 
cal and psychological treatments. 

Because bulimia is often comorbid with depression, it is not surprising that 
it has been treated with antidepressant medication, especially SSRIs. Medication 
is beneficial for some patients, but up to one-third of bulimic patients drop out 
of therapy because of unpleasant drug side effects, and relapse is the rule when 
medication is discontinued (Sysko, Sha, Wang, Duan, & Walsh, 2010; Narash- 
Eisikovits, Dierberger, & Westen, 2002). 

The major psychological intervention, as was the case with Tracy, is cogni¬ 
tive-behavior therapy (CBT; Cooper & Fairburn, 2010). Patients are encouraged 
to question society’s standards for physical attractiveness and learn that normal 
weight can be achieved without extreme dieting. Patients must also learn that diet¬ 
ing can trigger a binge and that all is not lost by eating a high-calorie afternoon 
snack. Another crucial step involves determining the situations that elicit binges 
and developing alternative ways of coping with them. The goal, then, is to estab¬ 
lish a normal pattern of eating three meals a day and even snacks between meals. 
Regular meals control hunger and thus make it less likely that a person will binge 
and then become anxious and purge. Results from these cognitive-behavioral inter¬ 
ventions are more favorable than those from treatment with antidepressant medica¬ 
tion (Shapiro et al., 2007; Wilson & Sysko, 2006). For some patients, the optimal 
treatment may involve a combination of both drugs and CBT. 

Unfortunately, only about half of bulimic patients improve significantly 
during treatment. One year after the end of treatment, only one-third are maintain¬ 
ing their treatment gains (Anderson & Maloney, 2001). What factors might explain 



250 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


these high rates of treatment failure? Desire to change is obviously one crucial 
element in any program aimed at the treatment of eating disorders. Relatively 
little is known about factors that influence these patients’ ability to appreciate the 
severity of their problems. Some people seem to accept their binge eating and 
adjust their lives around it. They are not motivated to change. Tracy was unable to 
benefit from her experience in group therapy until the dramatic evening when she 
devoured the birthday cake and found herself staring in the minor of her neigh¬ 
bor’s bathroom. This event clearly played a crucial role in her subsequent recovery. 

The abstinence violation effect can also contribute to continued binge eating 
and relapse in bulimia nervosa (Schlam & Wilson, 2007). This phenomenon was 
initially observed among people who are recovering from substance dependence. 
A single violation of abstinence is often sufficient to wipe out totally any treat¬ 
ment gains that had occurred. When a person violates his or her commitment 
to stop using drugs, a state of dissonance is created between the behavior and 
the self-image of the person. This dissonance motivates attempts to reduce it, 
for example, by changing the self-image: “I guess I haven’t really recovered.” 
Furthermore, the transgression is attributed to personal weakness, and thus the 
person is likely to expect future failures. 

Recognition of the impact of the abstinence violation effect led to the inclu¬ 
sion of relapse prevention elements in the type of group therapy that Tracy 
received. Tracy and the other members of her group were trained to recognize 
situations that could create pressure for them. Furthermore, she was given spe¬ 
cific training in coping with stress, including skills to handle problematic life 
situations and ways to deal with negative emotional states. Finally, she was told 
that minor lapses were likely and would not indicate that the treatment had failed 
or that she was a weak person. Within this framework, she was instructed on 
ways to cope with a single binge to reduce the likelihood that a single abstinence 
violation would lead to a complete resumption of her old pattern. 


Discussion Questions 


1. How would you draw a distinction between Tracy’s behavior during an epi¬ 
sode of bingeing and purging and the behavior of a person who is suffering 
from obsessive-compulsive disorder? Could her purging behavior be consid¬ 
ered a compulsion? Why not? 

2. Discuss the differences between bulimia and anorexia, especially with regard 
to issues related to impulse control. 

3. Why was Tracy’s emotional experience with the little girl’s birthday cake an 
important turning point in her treatment? What was the most important factor 
in changing her motivation for treatment? 

4. What are the connections among cognitive factors, emotion regulation, and 
binge eating? How are these issues related to dieting and restricted intake 
of food? 




CHAPTER 17 


Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder 
and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 


Daisy could not conceal her distress from Anna, her social worker. She 
swallowed nervously, trying to keep the tears from spilling down her cheeks. 
Anna handed her the box of tissues and encouraged her to go on. Two nights 
before, Daisy had experienced a terrifying and disturbing episode: waking up 
early in the morning with the intense sensation she was being threatened by an 
evil spirit and being unable to move. She could see and feel the heavy pressure 
on her chest of a spirit-like figure sitting on top of her and holding her down. 
She was gripped by the feeling the figure was sinister and threatening. It looked 
her directly in the face and was “vividly tangible, transparent, smoke-like,” with 
“an opening for a mouth, a head, no eyes, and a long, flowing body.” She felt 
like she could not breathe and heard a strange buzzing sound. Daisy had tried to 
scream and push the figure off her, but she had been fully immobilized and had 
felt completely panicked. She felt sensations at her neck, as if the spirit were 
going to move inside her, cut her neck, or choke her. Finally she came out of 
it, after what seemed like a half hour but what she later recognized was prob¬ 
ably only several frighteningly long minutes. As she became able to move, the 
odd hallucinations faded away, but she remained shaky, jumpy, and flooded with 
dread for the rest of the day. 

This was the first time Daisy had experienced anything this horrifying. 
Although she had been struggling with chronic, regular, and upsetting nightmares 
for several years, this one was something very different. Anna was alarmed by 
Daisy’s description and privately feared that Daisy was losing touch with reality. 
Immediately after the session, Anna contacted Daisy’s psychiatrist, who decided 
it was time to refer her to a sleep specialist. Clearly her nightmares were getting 
worse. The psychiatrist set up an appointment for Daisy at a sleep clinic with 
Dr. Amy Middleton, a clinical psychologist who specialized in sleep disorders. 


251 



252 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Social History 


Daisy Wu was a 28-year-old graduate student, working on her doctoral degree 
in East Asian art history. She had always been a creative, artistic person and had 
once hoped to have a career as an artist before deciding art history was somewhat 
more practical. She continued to paint almost every day, though, even during her 
rigorous graduate program. Daisy lived with her boyfriend Andrew, a graduate 
student in engineering. They had been together for 3 years, got along well, and 
talked often about getting married. She was hesitant to make such a commitment, 
however, as she worried her parents would disapprove of him because he was not 
Chinese. Andrew was supportive of Daisy. When she had the terrifying episode, 
he was awake in the other room working on a school project. He was reassur¬ 
ing and gentle when she had rushed out of the bedroom, ashen and shaky. He 
encouraged her to tell the social worker about the episode, even though Daisy was 
embarrassed about it and extremely reluctant to discuss it further. 

Daisy was struggling in her studies. She had finished all her coursework but 
could not bring herself to work on her dissertation, which was all that remained 
to finish her Ph.D. Every time she tried to work on it, she would “freeze up.” She 
felt unsupported by her dissertation advisor and felt that she would not be able 
to complete her degree. She feared she had wasted the years of her life spent in 
graduate school. She had received a letter from the department giving her a final 
deadline to complete her work or risk being excluded from the program, and yet 
she still found herself unable to work productively. She felt tremendous anxiety 
about her situation, and her mood was often depressed and sad. She often kept 
most of her distress to herself and was reluctant to burden those in her life with 
her problems. 

Her parents lived in Hong Kong, where Daisy had been born. The family 
had moved to Boston when Daisy was 4 years old. After Daisy and her younger 
brother, who was born in Massachusetts, were both in college, her parents had 
returned to China to care for their elderly parents. Throughout Daisy’s child¬ 
hood, her father was abusive. He would yell at Daisy’s mother and sometimes 
beat her. He often also was verbally and physically abusive to Daisy. Her strug¬ 
gles with sleeping over the past 4 years led her to see the psychiatrist, who 
started her on the medication and recommended she work with Anna. She really 
liked Anna and had been in therapy for about 4 years. They were working on 
issues from her childhood. At the same time, the psychiatrist continued to pre¬ 
scribe Prozac, BuSpar, and Klonopin for her anxiety and depression. 

Since the onset of her sleep difficulties, Daisy had experienced regular 
nightmares, about one or two a week. During the nightmares, she would often 
scream out and become violent, kicking in the bed and often injuring herself or 
Andrew. The nightmares varied in topic but often had themes of having to pro¬ 
tect herself from others or having experienced some injustice. Her mood was 
affected the entire day after a nightmare, and sometimes she would find herself 
reliving the nightmare while walking down the street, having a “flashback” that 




Chapter 17 Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 253 


would cause her to break suddenly into a run. She was miserable because of the 
nightmares and felt that they were ruining her mood and affecting her studies. 
They made her afraid to go to sleep. 


Treatment 


During her first session with Dr. Middleton, the sleep specialist, Daisy was coop¬ 
erative and talkative, but she was also fairly irritable. She identified the main 
reason for her inability to sleep as her nightmares, which would awaken her and 
make her unable to fall back asleep. Dr. Middleton obtained background infor¬ 
mation and descriptions of her nightmares, as well as a detailed description of 
the terrifying paralysis experience. Dr. Middleton also ordered a sleep study 
because Daisy said she was violent during her dreams, a rarity. Typically during 
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, the stage when the majority of dreams 
occur, people experience muscle atonia (paralysis) that keeps them from acting 
out dreams and harming themselves. During REM sleep, typically only the 
eyes move. Daisy’s violent movements during dreams could have been part 
of a neurological disorder, such as a degenerative neurological disease, like 
Parkinson’s disease, or from a lesion due to a stroke; these conditions are rare but 
could have accounted for her symptoms (Wills & Garcia, 2002). A sleep study, 
overnight polysomnography, is conducted in a sleep clinic. The patient being 
evaluated spends the night sleeping in the clinic, and the evaluation involves mul¬ 
tiple recordings of electrical impulses on the scalp and face, body movements and 
positions, and breathing. Daisy’s sleep study and medical evaluation ruled out a 
neurological disorder. 

Dr. Middleton also had Daisy complete the Minnesota Multiphasic Per¬ 
sonality Inventory (MMPI)-2, a questionnaire that would reveal her personality 
features so Dr. Middleton could understand her functioning better and make sure 
Daisy could tolerate the treatment she planned. Daisy’s MMPI profile indicated 
she was experiencing significant distress and discomfort, with fears of inad¬ 
equacy and high levels of free-floating anxiety. Her responses suggested she had 
trouble being assertive and felt guilty when she experienced anger. People with 
a similar profile often come from homes characterized by explosive and violent 
parents. Those people learn to cope by being unobtrusive to avoid angry attacks. 
Other coping strategies used by those with a similar set of responses are a ten¬ 
dency to deny having psychological problems and to repress their feelings. Her 
profile indicated that Daisy had enough psychological resilience to cope with the 
stress of treatment. In addition, Daisy completed questionnaires assessing her 
nightmares and how they were impacting her life, which would allow a com¬ 
parison after treatment to see if the treatment led to a reduction in the severity or 
frequency of the symptoms. 

Dr. Middleton diagnosed Daisy with nightmare disorder. She explained that 
Daisy’s one frightening experience of being paralyzed and seeing and feeling 




254 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


the evil spirit was called Isolated Sleep Paralysis (ISP), actually something 
distinct from her primary problem of nightmare disorder. While very upsetting, 
ISP is surprisingly common in the general population. It is more likely to occur 
when sleep is disturbed and when a person is under a lot of stress. Both of these 
conditions were true for Daisy, who was experiencing chronic insomnia due to 
the nightmares and stress from her academic struggles. Dr. Middleton reassured 
Daisy that the ISP would be less likely to recur if they improved her sleep qual¬ 
ity and quantity. Because her nightmare disorder was leading to Daisy’s poor 
sleep, Dr. Middleton proposed treating her nightmare disorder to improve the 
insomnia and reduce the chance of additional episodes of ISP. The treatment she 
proposed was Imagery Rehearsal Therapy (IRT), a cognitive behavioral treat¬ 
ment that includes education and cognitive restructuring that conceptualizes dis¬ 
turbing dreams as a habit, and uses imagery training to rewrite the script of a 
nightmare. IRT increases patients’ sense of control and helps them master the 
upsetting dream content. 

After the assessment was complete and Daisy agreed to undergo treat¬ 
ment for the nightmare disorder, the first treatment session was scheduled. 
During the first session, the goal was to educate Daisy about nightmares 
and teach her imagery techniques. When a person is exposed to uncontrol¬ 
lable or traumatic events, they seem to develop nightmares that might be 
viewed as one way to help them process the event emotionally. The night¬ 
mares can dissipate the intense negative emotion and help the person adapt. 
In effect, nightmares can serve as outlets for emotion that is too intense to 
handle while awake. Also, nightmares can help people focus on and form 
memories about important details from the traumatic event. These details 
might have survival value if the person faces a similar threat in the future. 
When the nightmares continue too long, however, they are no longer use¬ 
ful and instead become harmful. Nightmares can become a habit that inter¬ 
feres with sleep. To change a bad habit, it is necessary to practice undoing it. 
Dr. Middleton also explained that dreams can be affected by daytime behav¬ 
iors, as when elements from the day are dreamed about later. So, the goal of 
IRT is to practice behaviors during the day and to change thoughts about 
nightmares so Daisy can learn to change her nightmares using imagery. 
Imagery is a structured, intentional daydream. Daisy readily understood 
Dr. Middleton’s rationale and was interested in this new way of understanding 
the meaning and purpose of her nightmares, and how they can develop into a 
bad habit. 

The rest of the first session was spent teaching Daisy to practice imagery. 
First, she was taught to lie on a couch in the therapy room and practice relaxa¬ 
tion techniques. Next, she was asked to visualize the color red and then watch it 
fade to blue. When she was able to successfully imagine that, she practiced hear¬ 
ing the screech of chalk on a chalkboard and then visualizing the chalk crum¬ 
bling to powder. Next, she practiced changing an imagined scent of ammonia 
to lemon. She practiced changing the imagined sound of a siren in the middle 



Chapter 17 Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 255 


of the night to a softened sound of a flute. She visualized walking inside a dark 
tunnel and having it open up into a light, airy beach. After she became profi¬ 
cient at the imagery techniques, she was taught cognitive behavioral tools to deal 
with unpleasant images. For example, while imagining the beach, she was asked 
to introduce a vivid image of a storm brewing. Then she learned to interrupt 
thoughts using a mental image of a stop sign, while also using relaxation tech¬ 
niques. She was taught grounding techniques, where she focused her attention 
on all the places where her body was touching the couch, rather than focusing 
attention on the negative images. Also, she was taught mindfulness, the ability 
to be fully aware of the present moment with a focus on her feelings and physi¬ 
cal sensations, not to engage in judgment about the experience but rather to let it 
occur and then recede. 

Daisy seemed to enjoy learning these techniques and was cooperative and 
engaged during the sessions. As she was leaving the first treatment session, 
she paused and mentioned to Dr. Middleton that after hearing that ISP was 
common, she had worked up the courage to describe her terrifying episode to 
her mother while they were talking on Skype. She was shocked and surprised 
when her mother smiled calmly and told her that such an experience was called 
“ghost oppression,” because in the past everyone in China had believed that it 
was caused by ghosts haunting a person in the night. The name had stuck, 
even though few people still believed it was caused by ghosts. Even though her 
mother had never had an episode, she was familiar with the terror it caused. 

One week later, Daisy returned for the second session. She had completed 
her homework: practicing what they had worked on during the first session. 
Dr. Middleton asked her to identify a relatively mild nightmare to start work¬ 
ing on and told her they would gradually work up to worse nightmares after she 
mastered the less upsetting ones. Daisy selected a nightmare she had dreamed 
recently. In it she woke up in a gray house full of cobwebs and thousands of 
spiders and found her parents immobilized, half dead, and wrapped in a mas¬ 
sive cocoon. She thrashed around in the bed until she woke up. Dr. Middleton 
asked her to rewrite the dream any way she wanted, but in as much detail as 
possible. Daisy rewrote the dream so that she woke up to a bright, sunny day. 
She then walked outside and had breakfast with her family at a small table out¬ 
side on a patio. It was warm outside with a gentle breeze. She described the 
garden surrounding the patio in detail—the chirping of the birds visiting a hang¬ 
ing bird feeder, the murmur of a fountain against the wall of the house. Daisy 
struggled during the rewriting of the dream, finding it difficult to create more 
positive images because she found herself preoccupied by thoughts of the nega¬ 
tive images from the nightmare. Dr. Middleton supported her use of relaxation 
to cope with these intrusions. At one point, Daisy started to cry and said she felt 
unable to let the bad images go. Dr. Middleton noted it was difficult for her to let 
her grief over her childhood go and said the images of her parents in a cocoon 
could symbolize how they were closed off to her, while the spiders symbolized 
how her home had actually been full of dangers. But Dr. Middleton also pointed 



256 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


out that focusing on the meanings of a dream was not necessary to be able to 
change it. She reminded Daisy to rehearse her new dream for 10 minutes each 
day for the next 2 weeks and after 3 days, to select another nightmare to rewrite 
on her own. She also instructed Daisy to rehearse both newly changed dreams 
mentally for the remainder of the 2 weeks. 

The third session was held 2 weeks later. Dr. Middleton reviewed the idea 
that nightmares do not have to be linked to past trauma but can be seen as a 
learned behavior, a bad habit. The best way to change the bad habit is to change 
the story of the dream instead of rehashing the original nightmare. She assured 
Daisy that no one ever felt worse by decreasing the number of their disturbing 
dreams. Daisy had successfully practiced her imagery exercises and had tackled 
a more disturbing dream the previous week. In the second nightmare, she was 
at a movie theatre when a man came into the theatre late with a bunch of circus 
monkeys. She felt angry at him because he was disrupting the movie. Later in 
the dream, she returned home to find the same man in her kitchen threatening 
her with a knife. She rewrote the dream so that the man was not threatening but 
was friendly and used his knife to help her to chop vegetables to make dinner 
together. She easily visualized the new ending. 

A follow-up session was held 1 month later, during which Daisy repeated 
the earlier questionnaires. Daisy reported a dramatic reduction in the frequency 
and severity of her nightmares. Although she had experienced a couple of night¬ 
mares during that month, she felt that they were no longer interfering with her 
life. She had not had any more ISP episodes either. She mentioned that now she 
actually felt glad she had experienced the ISP because it was what had gotten 
her in to see the sleep specialist. She had not realized that nightmares could be 
treated directly. Daisy reported that she had begun using the techniques of vis¬ 
ualization, grounding, and mindfulness in her studies. She had visualized her¬ 
self working on her dissertation and being successful at it. She reported feeling 
more empowered and more in control of her life and her emotions. Therapy was 
concluded. 

Two months later, Daisy sent a postcard to Dr. Middleton telling her 
that she had successfully defended her dissertation and was graduating in 
2 weeks. She had told her parents about her intention to marry Andrew, and they 
had come to accept and support her decision. She and Andrew had scheduled 
their wedding for 1 month after graduation. She expressed her appreciation for 
the successful resolution of nightmares and insomnia. 


Discussion 


According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(. DSM-IV-TR ; APA, 2000, pp. 631-634), Daisy met the criteria for nightmare 
disorder, which is one of the sleep disorders. Sleep disorders are characterized 




Chapter 17 Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 257 


as either dyssomnias, which are abnormalities in the amount or timing of sleep, 
or parasomnias, which are abnormal behavioral or physiological events related 
to sleep. Nightmare disorder, a parasomnia, is defined by the following criteria: 

1. A person awakens repeatedly from the major sleep period with detailed 
recall of extended and extremely frightening dreams, usually involving 
threats to survival, security, or self-esteem. 

2. On awakening from the frightening dreams, the person rapidly becomes ori¬ 
ented and alert. 

3. The dream experience, or the sleep disturbance resulting from the awaken¬ 
ing, causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa¬ 
tional, or other important areas of functioning. 

4. The nightmares do not occur exclusively during the course of another men¬ 
tal disorder and are not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance 
or a general medical condition. 

Sleep is critically important for both physical health and people’s sense of 
general well-being. Inadequate levels of sleep have been linked to problems in 
mood, cognition, and general performance (Bootzin & Epstein, 2011). People 
who do not get enough sleep have trouble with memory and concentration, and 
they are at substantially increased risk to become depressed. Inadequate sleep 
also predicts later difficulty with anxiety and experiencing a negative mood, and 
sleep deprivation has been directly linked to problems with regulating emotions; 
insomnia could be a core mechanism in the cause and maintenance of numerous 
psychiatric difficulties (Harvey, 2008). Sleep loss results in people feeling worse 
when they cannot achieve a goal and not feeling as good when they do achieve a 
goal than if they had slept well. It also exacerbates obesity by increasing appetite 
and interfering with normal metabolism (Harvey, 2011). Daisy’s sleep distur¬ 
bance could well have played a role in initiating her irritability, depressed mood, 
and anxiety, and certainly helped to maintain her negative mood. Her mood dis¬ 
turbance also likely exacerbated her sleep difficulties. 

Despite growing evidence of the important role sleep plays in people’s func¬ 
tioning, a significant proportion of American adults report sleep disturbance or 
inadequate levels of sleep. Only about 30% of adults report that they always had 
enough sleep, and 10% indicate that they never sleep well (CDC, 2009). College 
students are at particular risk for sleep problems, both because their daily sched¬ 
ules vary widely depending on class times and staying up late to study, and 
also because they are more likely to have poor sleep hygiene practices (Brown, 
Buboltz, & Soper, 2002). For example, caffeine and alcohol use, noise distur¬ 
bance, worrying while trying to fall asleep, going to bed thirsty, lack of regu¬ 
lar exercise, and lack of a regular bedtime are all associated with poorer sleep. 
Many college students attempt to catch up on sleep over the weekend, which can 
actually exacerbate sleep disruption (Gaultney, 2010). In the past several dec¬ 
ades, college students have been sleeping less than before and reported greater 
problems with sleep, both in the United States and in Hong Kong and other 



258 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


areas of China (Sing & Wong, 2010). Female college students in Hong Kong 
were particularly likely to report sleep problems and worry interfering with their 
sleep (Suen, Hon, & Tam, 2008). So Daisy’s cultural background and early life 
in China was not inconsistent with her experiences as a college student in the 
United States, which were linked to worsened sleep quality and quantity. 

Daisy’s key difficulty with sleep was her chronic nightmares. Dreams can 
have a potentially beneficial function in helping people deal with traumatic 
episodes or stress. This may especially be the case with nightmares, which are 
frightening dreams that portray threats to the dreamer such as danger, humili¬ 
ation, or personal failure (Roberts, Lenning, & Heard, 2009). Research sug¬ 
gests that nightmares are on a continuum of other coping strategies (Picchioni & 
Hicks, 2009). There are also cultural differences in how people use nightmares 
to cope: European Americans are more likely to share their dreams with others 
and seek social support that involves emotional disclosure, whereas for Asian 
Americans having more frequent and intense nightmares is correlated with using 
other coping strategies, such as distancing oneself from the stressor, increas¬ 
ing efforts to control one’s feelings, or making attempts to solve the problem. 
Although nightmares may be an individually oriented method of coping with 
stress, nightmares do not appear to release tension but rather to induce it, so 
that people who have more negative life events experience more nightmares, 
feel more distress about their nightmares, and report significantly higher levels 
of anxiety (Roberts et al., 2009). For Daisy, nightmares definitely represented a 
source of anxiety because they were so painful and upsetting. 

Nightmares are very common: 86% of college students report having had 
a nightmare in the past year, and a quarter of students report having monthly 
nightmares (Zadra & Donderi, 2000). Research also suggests that people asked 
to recall frequencies of dreams are particularly likely to underreport bad dreams. 
Up to 10% of people report having nightmares every week (Levin & Nielsen, 
2007), and 8% of people report having a significant problem with nightmares 
(Miro & Martinez, 2005). Nightmares occur more commonly in females and are 
particularly common in childhood and adolescence, with frequencies reducing 
throughout adulthood into old age (Levin & Nielsen, 2007). Daisy’s sleep dif¬ 
ficulties revolved around nightmares and her fear of having one. 

Even though she had been struggling with nightmares, it was Daisy’s epi¬ 
sode of ISP that was the most frightening and ultimately led to her seeking 
treatment with a sleep specialist. Sleep paralysis occurs when people are either 
falling asleep or waking up. During the episode, they are able to open their eyes 
but are otherwise unable to move for up to several minutes, during which time 
they are fully aware of their surroundings (Paradis et al., 2009). Nearly 30% of 
college students report having at least one such episode, although the majority 
never told anyone for fear of a negative reaction. Episodes are commonly asso¬ 
ciated with fear, the sense of a threatening presence, the feeling of pressure on 
the chest and trouble breathing, and vivid and frightening auditory or visual 
hallucinations About 5% of students experienced a combination of numerous 



Chapter 17 Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 259 


symptoms in a detailed episode like Daisy described (Cheyne, 2002; Cheyne, 
Newby-Clark, & Rueffer, 1999). Even though many people have not heard of 
ISR a number of cultures have a widely known word or phrase to describe it. 
In Japan, experiences matching the typical description of ISP are called kanash- 
ibari (Arikawa, Templer, Brown, Cannon, & Thomas-Dodson, 1999), mean¬ 
ing “to tie with an iron rope” (Davies, 2003). In Mexico, the phenomenon is 
described by the folk expression, “a dead body climbed on top of me” (Jimenez- 
Genchi, Avila-Rodrfguez, Sanchez-Rojas, Terrez, & Nenclares-Portocarrero, 
2009). In Great Britain, the experience was traditionally called “stand stills” and 
thought to occur when the spirit left the body during sleep and failed to return 
upon awakening (Dahlitz & Parkes, 1993). In Indonesia, it is called tindihan, 
being weighed down by spirits. Research on the Salem witch trials and other 
historical accusations of witchcraft also reveals episodes similar to modern 
descriptions of ISP (Davies, 2003). In Hong Kong, the Chinese describe these 
experiences as “ghost oppression,” and a description of ISP appeals in a book 
on dreams written in China in 400 B.C. (Wing, Chiu, Leung, & Ng, 1999). In a 
number of traditional cultures, the phenomenon is discussed more openly. 

Typically, ISP occurs as an isolated incident, but some people experience 
repeated episodes (Dahlitz & Parkes, 1993). Many people who experience ISP 
also have significant difficulty with anxiety (Paradis et ah, 2009) or depression 
(Szklo-Coxe, Young, Finn, & Mignot, 2007). ISP has been associated with the 
position of sleeping on one’s back and with stressful life events and sleep dis¬ 
turbance (Paradis, Friedman, & Hatch, 1997). Also, Daisy’s episode occurred at 
a time when her life included many stresses, and her sleep was continually dis¬ 
turbed, which probably increased the likelihood of the episode. 

Daisy’s parasomnias, her nightmares and ISP, were related to her difficulty 
sleeping. Dr. Middleton did not address Daisy’s insomnia directly but indirectly 
by changing how she viewed her dreams. The central feature for identifying 
insomnia is the person’s subjective feeling of not having enough sleep, rather 
than the actual amount of time the person sleeps (Dikeos & Soldatos, 2005). 
Those who report insufficient sleep have higher levels of central nervous system 
arousal, both during waking and sleep states, and especially around bedtime due 
to their anxiety about sleeping. Like Daisy, many individuals who experience 
chronic insomnia tend to avoid or repress their feelings. 

Etiological Considerations 

People vary in their tendency to remember their dreams and in the vividness 
of their report of dreams. Those who report particularly vivid dreams have 
higher levels of imaginativeness and the ability to become intently absorbed in 
a task. They are also better able to experience states of flow—a reduced sense 
of self-consciousness when involved in a productive task (Watson, 2001). This 
ability to become completely absorbed is also associated with hypnotic abil¬ 
ity. Interestingly, Daisy showed high levels of artistic creativity, as might be 



260 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


expected. Such individuals are described as having “thin boundaries,” where 
psychological material can easily cross boundaries between different states of 
consciousness. These thin boundaries may also be more likely among people 
who experience hypnagogic hallucinations (intense dreamlike images while 
falling asleep) and hypnopompic hallucinations (while waking up). People with 
thin boundaries are more likely to report having frequent nightmares and to be 
affected by their nightmares during the day (Miro & Martinez, 2005). For peo¬ 
ple with thin boundaries, nightmare reports are associated with both stressful 
life events such as problems at work and reports of high levels of childhood 
adversity, such as abuse, neglect, and unreasonable punishment (Blagrove & 
Fisher, 2009). 

Defining what constitutes a nightmare is complicated. Dreams more often 
have negative content or emotional tone than positive (Zervas & Soldatos, 
2005). Nightmare sufferers, though, are more likely to report current stressful 
life events and a history of childhood trauma. They score higher on measures of 
psychological distress and report more feelings of guilt, anxiety, and depression 
(Berquier & Ashton, 1992). People who are distressed by nightmares are more 
likely to be physiologically and psychologically reactive when awake (Levin & 
Nielsen, 2007). They are more likely to focus on internal sensations, report 
somatic complaints, and be emotionally reactive. They are also more likely to 
experience affect distress —high levels of negative affect and extreme behavio¬ 
ral displays of that affect and distress. This pattern of signaling distress is more 
likely to be found among those raised with abuse, neglect, or insecure attach¬ 
ments and is particularly likely to be triggered when people feel they are los¬ 
ing control when under stress. Daisy had a family history of abuse but rarely 
produced extreme behavioral displays of her negative affect, possibly because of 
Chinese cultural values. Nevertheless, her nightmare distress is consistent with 
this research evidence. 

Dreams may serve the purpose of regulating unpleasant emotions. Upsetting 
dream images are triggered by emotional events during the day, and dream 
imagery may be the dreamer’s attempt to reduce this distress by changing the 
meanings or contexts of the experiences so they are not as conflictual (Kirmayer, 
2009). When this process is effective, the dreams become less upsetting through¬ 
out the night, but when ineffective, the dream becomes too negatively intense 
and awakens the dreamer as a nightmare. Distressing dreams may be understood 
as a dysfunction of the dreaming function of eliminating fear memories and 
reducing negative affect (Levin & Nielsen, 2009). Attempts to suppress thoughts 
about threatening things during waking states can lead to dream rebound, where 
the threatening themes or elements are more likely to occur in dreams (Wegner, 
Wenzlaff, & Kozak, 2004). People who have high levels of affect distress may 
scan their dream content for threatening elements and experience a panic reac¬ 
tion to them as a danger or threat signal, similar to the false alarm that occurs 
during panic disorder (Levin & Nielsen, 2009), resulting in distressing chronic 
nightmares. Daisy had a tendency to try to avoid talking about her personal 
difficulties because she was raised with the cultural value of avoiding being a 



Chapter 17 Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 261 

burden to others. It is possible that her attempts to avoid thinking about her fears 
were backfiring and making those fears more salient and more likely to emerge 
as nightmare content. In addition, Daisy had high levels of affect distress which 
may have made her vulnerable to reacting fearfully to her own dream images. 

Sleep paralysis sometimes occurs as part of another sleep disorder, nar¬ 
colepsy, which is characterized by involuntary and sudden attacks of sleep 
during waking states. Narcolepsy has a genetic component. ISP, which occurs 
separately from narcolepsy, may also have a genetic component, although there 
are also environmental correlates. In general, things that interfere with sleep 
(including depression and anxiety, as well as life stresses) increase the likelihood 
of ISP episodes. The experience of sleep paralysis is thought to be due to REM 
sleep atonia occurring at inappropriate times (Dahlitz & Parkes, 1993). 
REM sleep atonia is the lack of muscle control during REM sleep. 


Treatment 

The most strongly supported treatment of nightmare disorder is imagery 
rehearsal therapy (IRT), which has been shown to reduce both the frequency 
of nightmares as well as the distress associated with them (Krakow & Zadra, 
2006). IRT has two primary components. The first is educational and cognitive 
restructuring, changing the way the client views nightmares so he or she sees 
them as learned behaviors that negatively impact sleep. The second is imagery 
training, teaching the client how to use imagery to reduce nightmares. Dr. 
Middleton used this treatment approach in her work with Daisy. One of the main 
reasons IRT works may be that it increases a person’s sense of mastery of their 
dreams, giving them a feeling of control that reduces their negative emotions and 
distress (Germain et al., 2004). 

Nightmares can be conceptualized as a primary disorder worthy of direct 
treatment rather than as a secondary symptom of an underlying problem. This 
view is supported by evidence that IRT is effective. If nightmares were only a 
secondary symptom, IRT should not work because it does not focus on anything 
but the nightmares themselves (Moore & Krakow, 2010). IRT leads to reduc¬ 
tions in patient reports of depression and anxiety, as well as other posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms, in addition to reduction in nightmare sever¬ 
ity and frequency. This evidence supports the approach of treating nightmares 
directly as a sleep disorder without focusing on traumatic precipitants that may 
have contributed to the development of the nightmare disorder. Dr. Middleton’s 
approach with Daisy was consistent with this evidence. 


Asian Americans and Psychological Intervention 


Cultural issues are important to consider, particularly in diverse societies, such 
as the United States and Canada. Despite our increasing understanding of the 




262 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


role of biological factors in mental illness and how to prevent and treat many 
disorders, social circumstances also cannot be ignored. Because of Daisy’s eth¬ 
nicity, we close this case study with a consideration of some diversity issues in 
psychotherapy. 

It is generally assumed that patients do better with therapists who are simi¬ 
lar to them in cultural and ethnic background. Therapists of similar background 
and the same gender may better understand the patient’s life circumstance and 
will be better able to build rapport with them. Similarity between patient 
and therapist may strengthen the therapeutic alliance. Yet it has not been dem¬ 
onstrated that better outcomes are achieved when patient and therapist are 
similar in race or ethnicity (Beutler, Machado, & Neufeldt, 1994). There are cer¬ 
tainly many successful cases involving therapists and patients of different eth¬ 
nic backgrounds and different genders, including Daisy’s case. Research in this 
area involves making generalizations about the reactions of groups of people to 
psychotherapy, which runs the risk of oversimplifying or stereotyping people. 
Nonetheless, ethnic and cultural factors are increasingly being recognized as 
important. When therapists express values that clash with traditional Asian val¬ 
ues, they are perceived as more culturally competent when they openly acknowl¬ 
edge racial differences in discussions with the client than when they do not (Li, 
Kim, & O’Brien, 2007). Openly discussing these issues is beneficial to the thera¬ 
peutic relationship. 

Because Daisy was Chinese American, some general comments on therapy 
with Asian Americans are offered here. But first, it is important to bear in mind 
that Asians living in the United States and Canada, as well as other parts of the 
world, comprise more than 40 distinct groups (e.g., Filipino, Chinese, Japanese, 
Vietnamese, Cambodian, Hmong) and differ on such dimensions as how well 
they speak English, whether they immigrated or came as refugees from war or 
terrorism in their homeland, and how much they identify with their native land 
(or that of their parents if they were born in the United States) (Nezu, 2010). 
In general, Asian Americans are more ashamed of emotional suffering, more 
reluctant to seek professional help, and less assertive than European Americans. 
Daisy had been in therapy for 4 years and was willing to seek help for her sleep 
disorder. However, her embarrassment about discussing her nightmares could 
have stemmed in part from the cultural values espoused during her upbringing. 

Asian Americans have been stereotyped as being highly educated, wealthy, 
and emotionally well adjusted, but actually they have been the target of severe 
discrimination (Sue & Sue, 1999). For example, more than 100,000 Japanese 
Americans were imprisoned in concentration camps for several years during 
World War II without any evidence that they posed a security threat. Recently, 
discrimination has been more subtle but nonetheless hurtful. 

Many suggestions have been made for conducting psychotherapy with 
Asian Americans. Sue and Sue (1999) advise therapists to be sensitive to the 
personal losses that many Asian refugees have suffered and, especially in light 



Chapter 17 Parasomnia: Nightmare Disorder and Isolated Sleep Paralysis 263 


of the great importance that family connections have for them, to the likeli¬ 
hood that they are very stressed from these losses. Therapists should also be 
aware that Asian Americans have a tendency to “somaticize”—to experience 
and to talk about stress in physical terms, such as headaches and fatigue, 
rather than to view their stress in psychological terms, which they often see 
as equivalent to being crazy or inferior (Nguyen, 1985). Asian values are also 
different from the Western values of the majority culture in the United States. 
For example, Asians are more likely to respect structure and formality in inter¬ 
personal relationships, whereas a Western therapist is likely to favor informal¬ 
ity and a less authoritarian attitude. Respect for authority may take the form of 
agreeing readily to what the therapist does and proposes and, perhaps, rather 
than discussing differences openly, just not showing up for the next session. 
Psychotherapy carries more stigma among Asian Americans, whose cultural val¬ 
ues encourage emotional self-control (Kim, 2007). Asian Americans may also 
consider some areas off-limits for discussion with a therapist, such as the nature 
of the marital relationship and especially sex. 

Asian Americans born in the United States are often caught between two 
cultures. One way they resolve this tension is to identify vigorously with major¬ 
ity values and denigrate anything Asian, a kind of racial self-hate. This phenom¬ 
enon occurs in other ethnic groups that have been discriminated against, such 
as African Americans and Jews. Others, torn by conflicting loyalties, are angry 
at discriminatory Western culture, but at the same time question aspects of their 
Asian background. A meta-analysis of research on acculturation, the extent to 
which people of Asian descent have come to identify with American mainstream 
culture, found that those who were more acculturated to American culture were 
slightly less likely to be psychologically distressed or depressed (Yoon, Langrehr, 
& Ong, 2011). Finally, therapists may have to be more directive and active than 
they otherwise might be, given the preference of many Asian Americans for a 
structured approach over a reflective one (Iwamasa, 1993). 

Where does Daisy fit in here? Like many children of immigrants, she had 
largely acculturated to the dominant U.S. culture. It is not clear whether cul¬ 
tural factors, individual personality traits, or a combination of the two contrib¬ 
uted to her symptoms. It could be that, had the therapy not been time-limited and 
focused on her sleep disturbance, more information would have emerged about 
the influence of her cultural background on her presenting problems. When ther¬ 
apists remain sensitive to cultural issues, they will be more likely to be effective 
in treating their patients’ problems. 


Discussion Questions 


1. How could Daisy’s ethnic background have affected her disorder? What 
Asian cultural values are related to her symptoms? 




264 


Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


2. Have you ever heard of any cases of Isolated Sleep Paralysis (ISP)? What 
effect does change of awareness about this phenomenon have on people who 
experience it today? 

3. What special challenges do you think students today face with sleep? What 
recommendations would you make to students about how to juggle compet¬ 
ing demands on their time? 

4 . Do you think more direct discussion of racial and ethnic issues in Daisy’s 
therapy would have been useful? Was it unnecessary? Would it have helped 
or hurt? 



CHAPTER 18 


Paranoid Personality Disorder 


This case study is based on personal, rather than clinical, experience. Joe Fuller 
was in treatment for a brief period of time, but he terminated the relationship 
well before a therapy plan was formulated. This pattern is, in fact, characteristic 
of this type of person; people who are paranoid seldom seek professional serv¬ 
ices and, when they do, are difficult to work with. One of the authors was well 
acquainted with Joe during high school and college and has stayed in contact 
with him throughout subsequent years. 


Social History 


Joe was the third of four children. He had two older brothers and a younger sis¬ 
ter. His father was a steamfitter, and his mother was a homemaker. The family 
lived in a lower-middle-class neighborhood in a large, northeastern city. Joe’s 
grandmother also lived with them, beginning when Joe was 11 years old. She 
was an invalid and could not care for herself after Joe’s grandfather died. 

Our first information about Joe comes from his high school years. Unlike 
his older brothers, Joe was an exceptionally bright student. On the basis of his 
performance in elementary school and entrance examinations, he was admitted 
to a prestigious public high school. The school was widely recognized for aca¬ 
demic excellence. More than 90% of the graduating seniors went on to college; 
most went to Ivy League schools. The school was also known as a “pressure 
cooker.” All of the students were expected to meet very high standards; those 
who failed were denigrated by their peers. Joe thrived in this intellectually com¬ 
petitive environment. He usually received the highest test scores in his classes, 
particularly in science. These achievements were based on a combination of 
intelligence and hard work. Joe was clearly very bright, but so were most of the 
other students in this school. Joe was a serious student who seemed to be driven 
by a desire to succeed. Although many of the other students worried about 
examinations and talked to one another about their fear of failure, Joe exuded 


265 




266 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


self-confidence. He knew that the teachers and other students viewed him as one 
of the best students; he often made jokes about people who “couldn’t make the 
grade.” This critical attitude was not reserved for other students alone. Whenever 
a teacher made a mistake in class, Joe was always the first to laugh and make a 
snide comment. His classmates usually laughed along with him, but they also 
noticed a sneering, condescending quality in Joe’s humor that set him apart 
from themselves. 

Joe was a classic example of the critic who could “dish it out but couldn’t 
take it.” He was extremely sensitive to criticism. It did not seem to matter 
whether the criticism was accurate or justified; Joe was ready to retaliate at the 
slightest provocation. He argued endlessly about examinations, particularly in 
mathematics and science classes. If he lost points on any of his answers, even if 
he had gotten an “A” on the exam, he would insist that his answer was correct, 
the question was poorly written, or the teacher had not adequately explained the 
topic prior to the exam. He never admitted that he was wrong. 

His sensitivity was also evident in interpersonal relationships. Most peo¬ 
ple are able to laugh at themselves, but Joe could not. His family background 
was a particularly sore spot. Many of the other students in his school were from 
wealthy homes. Their parents were mostly professionals with advanced degrees. 
Joe seemed to be self-conscious about his father’s lack of formal education and 
the fact that his family did not live in a large, modern house. He never admitted 
it openly, but the topic led to frequent arguments. The following example was a 
typical instance of this sort. Joe had been arguing in class about his grade on 
a chemistry examination. After class, he overheard another student say to one 
of his friends, “I don’t know why some people have to work so hard for eve¬ 
rything.” The other boy’s father happened to be a successful businessman. Joe 
took his comment to mean that Joe was trying to compensate for the fact that 
his family did not have a lot of money. This implied insult, which may or may 
not have been a simple comment about Joe’s aggressive behavior, infuriated him. 
Two nights later, while everyone else was watching a school basketball game, 
Joe sneaked out into the parking lot and poured sugar into the gas tank of the 
other boy’s car so that the engine would be ruined. 

Joe did not participate in organized sports or student organizations, and he 
tended to avoid group activities. He did have a small circle of friends and was 
particularly close to two other boys. They were people whom he had judged 
to be his intellectual equals, and they were the only people in whom he could 
confide. He was interested in women, but his attitude toward them and his 
interactions with them struck his friends as being somewhat odd. The issues 
of dependence and control seemed to be of central importance to Joe. 
Whenever one of his friends spent a lot of time with a girlfriend or went out 
with her instead of a group of guys, Joe accused him of being spineless or “on 
a tight leash.” 

Joe seldom dated the same woman twice. He usually insisted that she was 
weird or boring, but, if the truth were known, most of them would not have gone 



Chapter 18 Paranoid Personality Disorder 267 


out on another date with him if he had asked. They found Joe to be rude and 
arrogant. He was not interested in being friends; his sole purpose was to make a 
sexual conquest. He often bragged about having sex with many women, but his 
closest friends suspected that he was still a virgin. 

In most respects, Joe’s relationship with his family was unremarkable. They 
were not a tight-knit family, but he respected his parents and got along well 
with his older brothers and his sister. His principal problem at home centered 
on his grandmother, whom he hated. He complained about her continuously to 
his friends, saying that she was old and crippled, and he wished that his par¬ 
ents would ship her off to a nursing home. Her inability to care for herself and 
her dependence on Joe’s parents seemed to be particularly annoying to him. He 
noted on several occasions that if he was ever in a similar situation, he hoped 
that someone would put him out of his misery. 

After graduating from high school, Joe enrolled at an Ivy League university, 
where he majored in chemistry and maintained a straight-A average through¬ 
out his first 2 years. He seemed to study all the time; his friends described him 
as a workaholic. Everything he did became a preoccupation. If he was study¬ 
ing for a particular course, he concentrated on that topic day and night, 7 days 
a week. If he was involved in a laboratory project, he practically lived in the 
laboratory. Relaxation and recreation were not included in his schedule. Even 
if he had the time, there were few leisure activities that Joe enjoyed. He had 
never been particularly athletic and was, in fact, clumsy. He hated to lose at any¬ 
thing and was also afraid of being ridiculed for looking awkward, so he avoided 
sports altogether. 

Joe’s first steady relationship with a woman began during his sophomore 
year. Carla was a student at a small liberal arts college in upstate New York. 
They happened to meet at a small party while she was visiting friends in New 
York City. Several weeks later, Joe drove to spend the weekend with her. They 
continued to see each other once or twice a month throughout the spring semes¬ 
ter. From Joe’s point of view, this was an ideal relationship. He liked Carla; she 
shared his sarcastic, almost bitter, sense of humor, and they got along well sexu¬ 
ally. Perhaps most important, the fact that she was not in the same city meant 
that she could not demand a great deal of his time and could not try to control 
his schedule or activities. 

The relationship ended after a few months when Carla told Joe that she had 
another boyfriend. Although he was shocked and furious, he made every effort to 
seem calm and rational. He had always taken pride in his ability to avoid emo¬ 
tional reactions, particularly if they were expected. In discussing the situation 
with friends, Joe maintained that he had never really cared for Carla and said 
that he was interested only in her body. Nevertheless, he was clearly interested in 
revenge. His first plan was to win her back so that he could then turn the tables 
and drop her. Presumably this process would demonstrate to everyone that he, 
not Carla, had been in control of the relationship. When this effort failed, he set¬ 
tled for spreading rumors about Carla’s promiscuous sexual behavior. 



268 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


After his breakup with Carla, Joe became more deeply involved in his 
laboratory work. He would disappear for days at a time and seldom saw any 
of his friends. The experiments he was running were apparently based on his 
own ideas. His assigned work and routine studying were largely ignored; conse¬ 
quently, his academic performance began to deteriorate. 

The experience with Carla also contributed to an increase in Joe’s already 
cynical attitude toward women. He described her behavior as treacherous and 
deceitful and took the rejection as one more piece of evidence proving that he 
could not trust anyone, particularly a woman. He continued to go out on dates, 
but he was extremely suspicious of women’s intentions and obviously jealous of 
their attention to other men. On one occasion, he went to a party with a woman 
he met in one of his classes. They arrived together, but Joe chose to ignore her 
while he chatted with some male friends in the kitchen. When he later discov¬ 
ered his date talking with another man in the living room, he became rude and 
offensive. He insulted the woman, made jokes about her clothes and the makeup 
she was wearing, and suggested that her friend was gay. As might be expected, 
they never saw each other again. Another time, after he had dated a woman 
once, he sat in his parked car outside her apartment and watched the entrance for 
2 nights to determine whether one of his friends was also seeing her. 


Later Adjustment 


After receiving his B.S. degree, Joe stayed on at the same university to do grad¬ 
uate work in biochemistry. He continued to work very hard and was consid¬ 
ered one of the most promising students in the department. His best work was 
done in the laboratory, where he was allowed to pursue independent research. 
Classroom performance was more of a problem. Joe resented being told what to 
do and what to read. He believed that most faculty members were envious of his 
intellect. Highly structured reading lists and laboratory assignments, which were 
often time consuming, were taken by Joe to be efforts to interfere with his pro¬ 
fessional advancement. 

In his second year of graduate school, Joe began dating an undergraduate 
woman in one of his study sections. Ruth was unremarkable in every way. His 
friends described her as plain, bland, and mousy. They were surprised that Joe 
was even interested in her, but in retrospect, she had one general feature that 
made her perfect for Joe—she was not at all threatening. He made all the deci¬ 
sions in the relationship, and she acquiesced to his every whim and fancy. Other 
men were not interested in her. In fact, they seldom noticed her, so Joe did not 
have to remain constantly alert to the possibility of desertion. They were perfect 
complements to each other and were married within a year. 

Joe’s first job after getting his Ph.D. was as a research chemist for a major 
drug company. At the beginning, it seemed like an ideal position. He was 
expected to work somewhat independently doing basic biochemical research. 




Chapter 18 Paranoid Personality Disorder 269 


There was no question that he was intellectually capable of the work, and his 
willingness to work long hours would be beneficial to his advancement, which 
was closely tied to productivity. Joe expected to be promoted rapidly and was 
confident that he would be the head of a division within 5 years. 

When Joe began working in the company laboratory, he quickly evaluated 
all the employees and their relationship to his own position. There were several 
young Ph.D.s like himself, three supervisors, and the head of the laboratory, 
Dr. Daniels, a distinguished senior investigator. Joe admired Dr. Daniels and 
wanted to impress him. He did not think much of his young colleagues 
and particularly resented the supervisors, whom he considered to be his intel¬ 
lectual inferiors. He believed that they had been promoted because they were 
“yes-men,” not because they were competent scientists. He often complained 
about them to his peers and occasionally laughed openly about their mistakes. 
When they asked him to perform a specific experiment, particularly if the task 
was tedious, he was arrogant and resentful, but he usually complied with the 
request. He hoped that the quality of his work would be noticed by Dr. Daniels, 
who would then allow him to work more independently. He also worried, how¬ 
ever, that the others would notice that he was being subservient in an effort to 
gain Dr. Daniel’s favor. He became more and more self-conscious and was con¬ 
stantly alert to signs of disdain and rejection from the others in the laboratory. 
The others gradually came to see him as rigid and defensive, and he eventually 
became isolated from the rest of the group. He interpreted their rejection as evi¬ 
dence of professional jealousy. 

Joe’s initial work did gain some recognition, and he was given greater inde¬ 
pendence in his choice of projects. He was interested in the neurochemical basis 
of depression and spent several months pursuing a series of animal experiments 
aimed at specific details of his personal theory. Very few people knew what 
he was doing. He refused to discuss the research with anyone other than Dr. 
Daniels. Even then, he was careful to avoid the description of procedural details. 
His principal concern was that other people might get credit for his ideas. He 
wanted to impress Dr. Daniels, but he also wanted to take over Dr. Daniels’s job. 
The quickest way to do that was to make a major breakthrough in the laboratory, 
one for which he alone would receive credit. 

Dr. Daniels and the other supervisors recognized that Joe was exception¬ 
ally bright and a talented, dedicated scientist. They liked his early work at the 
company but were dissatisfied with the independent work that he was pursu¬ 
ing. There were no immediate, practical implications to this line of research, 
and it did not promise to lead to any commercial results in the near future. 
Consequently, Joe was told that his work was not acceptable and that he would 
have to return to doing work that was more closely supervised. 

Joe’s response to this criticism was openly hostile. He complained bit¬ 
terly about the imbeciles in company management and swore that he would 
no longer tolerate their jealousy and stupidity. He was certain that someone 
had learned about his ideas and that Dr. Daniels and the others were trying 



270 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


to force him out of the company so that they could then publish the theory 
without giving him credit. Their insistence that he discontinue his work and 
return to more menial tasks was clear proof, from Joe’s point of view, that they 
wanted to slow down his progress so that they could complete the most impor¬ 
tant experiments themselves. His paranoid ideas attracted considerable atten¬ 
tion. Other people began to avoid him, and he sometimes noticed that they 
gave him apprehensive glances. It did not occur to him that these responses 
were provoked by his own hostile behavior. He took their behavior as further 
evidence that the whole laboratory was plotting against him. As the tension 
mounted, Joe began to fear for his life. 

The situation soon became intolerable. After 3 years with the firm, Joe was 
told that he would have to resign. Dr. Daniels agreed to write him a letter of 
reference so that he could obtain another position as long as he did not contest 
his termination. Joe considered hiring a lawyer to help him fight for his job, 
but he became convinced that the plot against him was too pervasive for him to 
win. He also had serious doubts about being able to find a lawyer he could trust. 
He therefore decided to apply for other positions and eventually took a job as a 
research associate working with a faculty member at a large state university. 

In many ways, the new position was a serious demotion. His salary was 
considerably less than it had been at the drug company, and the position carried 
much less prestige. Someone with Joe’s academic credentials and experience 
should have been able to do better, but he had not published any of his research. 
He was convinced that this lack of professional success could be attributed to 
interference from jealous, incompetent administrators at the drug company. 
A more plausible explanation was that his work had never achieved publishable 
form. Although the ideas were interesting, and his laboratory techniques were 
technically skillful, Joe was not able to connect the two facets of his work to 
produce conclusive results. He was also a perfectionist. Never satisfied with 
the results of an experiment, he insisted on doing follow-up after follow-up and 
could not bring himself to consider a piece of work finished. The thought of sub¬ 
mitting an article and having it rejected by a professional journal was extremely 
anxiety provoking. Thus, despite his recognized brilliance and several years 
of careful research, Joe was not able to land anything better than this job as a 
research associate. 

Joe did not like the new job, partly because he thought it was beneath him 
and also because his activity was even more highly structured than it had been at 
the drug company. He was working on a research grant in which all the experi¬ 
ments had been planned in advance. Although he complained a good deal about 
the people who had ruined his career and expressed a lack of interest in the new 
line of work, he did high-quality work and was tolerated by the others in the lab¬ 
oratory. The salary was extremely important to Joe and Ruth because they now 
had a young daughter, who was 2 years old. There were also some other features 
about the job that were attractive to Joe. Much of his work was planned, but 
he was allowed to use the laboratory in his spare time to pursue his own ideas. 



Chapter 18 Paranoid Personality Disorder 271 


It was an active research program, and the department included a number of 
well-known faculty members. Joe believed that these people, particularly his 
boss, Dr. Willner, would soon recognize his talent and that he would eventually 
be able to move into a faculty position. 

Things did not work out the way Joe had planned. After he had been work¬ 
ing at the university for 1 year, Dr. Willner asked him to curtail his independ¬ 
ent research. He explained that these outside experiments were becoming too 
expensive and that the main research funded by the grant would require more 
of the laboratory’s time. Joe did not accept this explanation, which he consid¬ 
ered to be an obvious excuse to interfere with his personal work. He believed 
that Dr. Willner had pretended to be disinterested in Joe’s work while he actually 
kept careful tabs on his progress. In fact, he took this interference to indicate that 
Dr. Willner believed Joe’s research was on the verge of a breakthrough. Joe 
continued to work independently when he had the opportunity and became 
even more secretive about his ideas. Several weeks after these developments, 
Dr. Willner hired another research associate and asked Joe to share his office 
with the new person. Joe, of course, believed that the new person was hired and 
placed in his office solely to spy on his research. 

As the tension mounted at work, Joe’s relationship with Ruth became 
severely strained. They had never had a close or affectionate relationship and 
now seemed on the verge of open conflict. Ruth recognized that Joe was overre¬ 
acting to minor events. She did not want him to lose another job. She often tried 
to talk rationally with him in an effort to help him view these events from a more 
objective perspective. These talks led to arguments, and Joe finally accused her 
of collaborating with his enemies. He suggested that the people from the drug 
company and from the university had persuaded her to help them steal his ideas 
and then get rid of him. As Joe became more paranoid and belligerent, Ruth 
became fearful for her own safety and for that of her daughter. She eventually 
took their daughter with her to live with Ruth’s parents and began divorce pro¬ 
ceedings. Her desertion, as Joe viewed it, provided more evidence that she had 
been part of the plot all along. 

Two weeks after Ruth left, Joe began to experience panic attacks. The first 
one occurred while he was driving home from work. He was alone in the car, 
the road was familiar, and the traffic pattern was not particularly congested. 
Although the temperature was cool, Joe noticed that he was perspiring profusely. 
His hands and feet began to tingle, and his heart seemed to be beating irregu¬ 
larly. When he began to feel dizzy and faint, he had to pull the car off the road 
and stop. His shirt was now completely soaked with perspiration, and his breath¬ 
ing was rapid and labored. At the time, he thought that he was going to smother. 
All in all, it was a terrifying experience. The symptoms disappeared as quickly 
as they had appeared; within 10 minutes, he was able to get back on the road 
and drive home. He experienced three such incidents within a 2-week period and 
became so concerned about his health that he overcame his distrust of physicians 
and made an appointment for a physical examination. 



272 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


The physician was unable to discover any medical disorder and recom¬ 
mended that Joe consult a psychiatrist about his anxiety. Joe reluctantly agreed 
that a psychiatrist might be of help and arranged an appointment with Dr. Fein. 
The issue of Joe’s paranoid thinking did not come up during his conversations 
with Dr. Fein because Joe did not consider it to be a problem. Furthermore, he 
knew that other people thought that he was overly suspicious and that some peo¬ 
ple would consider him to be mentally ill. He therefore carefully avoided talking 
about the efforts to steal his ideas and did not mention the plot involving his 
wife and former colleagues. He simply wanted to know what was causing the 
panic attacks and how he could control them. At the end of his second session. 
Dr. Fein suggested that Joe begin taking imipramine (Tofranil), an antidepres¬ 
sant drug that has also been effective in treating panic anxiety. This suggestion 
precipitated an extended conversation about the physiological action of mood- 
stabilizing drugs that escalated into a heated argument. 

Joe had been disappointed with Dr. Fein. He did not believe that Dr. Fein 
understood his problem (i.e., the panic attacks) and resented the many open- 
ended, probing questions that he asked about Joe’s personal life. Dr. Fein 
believed that he was trying to complete a thorough assessment that would allow 
him to place this specific problem in an appropriate context, but Joe consid¬ 
ered this line of inquiry an invasion of privacy regarding matters for which he 
had not sought advice. The prospect of taking antidepressant drugs further 
aroused Joe’s suspicions. He began asking Dr. Fein about the neurological 
mechanisms affected by this drug—a topic with which he was intimately famil¬ 
iar because of his own research at the drug company. He was obviously better 
versed on this subject than Dr. Fein and concluded that Dr. Fein was therefore 
incompetent because he recommended a treatment that he could not explain 
completely. Joe finally ended the conversation by telling Dr. Fein that he thought 
he was a quack. He stormed out of the office and did not return. 

The panic attacks continued at the approximate rate of one a week for the 
next 3 months. Joe also noticed that he frequently felt physically ill and nau¬ 
seated, even on days when he did not experience a panic attack. Searching for 
an explanation for these escalating problems, and considering his conviction 
that other people were trying to harm him, he finally borrowed some equipment 
from another department and checked the radiation levels in his laboratory. He 
claimed that he found an unusually high level of radiation coming from a new 
balance that Dr. Willner had recently purchased. That was the final piece of 
evidence he needed. He believed that the people who were conspiring against 
him, including Dr. Willner, the people from the drug company, and his wife, 
had planted the radioactive balance in his laboratory so that he would eventu¬ 
ally die from radiation poisoning. It struck him as a clever plot. He spent much 
more time in the laboratory than anyone else and would therefore receive very 
high doses of radiation. The others were presumably wearing special clothing to 
screen them from the radiation, thus further reducing their own risk. 



Chapter 1 8 Paranoid Personality Disorder 273 


Joe confronted Dr. Willner with this discovery. As expected. Dr. Willner 
denied any knowledge of radioactivity emanating from the balance. He sug¬ 
gested that Joe should take some time away from the laboratory. He had obvi¬ 
ously been under a lot of strain lately, considering the divorce proceedings, 
and could benefit from the rest. Joe was certain that this was a ruse to allow 
the conspirators to remove the evidence of what he now called the assassination 
attempt. He refused to take time off and insisted that he would not let the others 
steal his ideas. The following day, he went to the office of the president of the 
university to demand a formal investigation. An informal series of meetings was 
eventually arranged involving various members of the laboratory and representa¬ 
tives of the university administration. Joe also contacted the government agency 
that funded Dr. Willner's research, which conducted its own investigation. The 
result of this time-consuming process was that Joe lost his job. No one was able 
to find any evidence of a conspiracy to harm Joe or steal his ideas. Both investi¬ 
gations concluded that Joe should seek professional help to deal with his unwar¬ 
ranted suspicions. 

When he left the university, Joe took a job driving a cab. This final fiasco 
had ruined his chances of obtaining another research position. No one would 
write him letters of recommendation. He was, of course, convinced that he had 
been blacklisted and did not consider the possibility that his problems were cre¬ 
ated by his own antagonistic behavior. In many ways, the change in occupations 
led to positive changes in Joe’s adjustment. He seemed to love driving a cab. He 
worked late at night, when most other cabbies were sleeping, and was thus in a 
noncompetitive situation. The people with whom he interacted were not threat¬ 
ening to his sense of intellectual superiority. In fact, he derived considerable 
enjoyment from telling his friends stories about the derelicts and imbeciles that 
rode in his cab. Joe was quite content with the situation. He lived by himself in 
a small apartment, maintained a small circle of friends, and planned to continue 
working as a cab driver. He was still arrogant and resented his past treatment but 
seemed resigned to his status as a martyr in the world of chemistry. The need 
for constant vigilance was greatly reduced because he no longer had access to a 
laboratory and could not continue to work on his ideas. 


Fifteen-Year Follow-Up 


Joe had found an occupational and social niche in which he was able to function 
on a relatively stable basis. He continued to live in the same community, work¬ 
ing as a cab driver. Still convinced that Ruth had betrayed him, Joe never tried 
to contact her again. He had no further contact with his daughter. He remained 
grandiose, suspicious, and frequently contemptuous of others, but his condition 
did not deteriorate any further. In fact, he functioned relatively well, given his 
maladaptive personality traits. His small and rather loose-knit circle of friends 




274 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


afforded him some support and enough companionship to suit his modest needs. 
Because he did not see himself as having any psychological problems, Joe did 
not seek additional treatment after his brief encounter with Dr. Fein. 

Five years after Ruth left him, Joe developed a relationship with a new girl¬ 
friend. Wendy worked as a dispatcher for the cab company. Like his former wife, 
she was quiet and shy—a perfect complement to his narcissism. Wendy was 
infatuated with Joe, and he loved to show off for her. He was obviously different 
in many ways from the other people who worked for the company. Having only 
a limited education, Wendy was easily impressed by his intelligence and appar¬ 
ent knowledge of the world. She treated him with extreme deference. At work, 
she helped him to receive special privileges with the hours and routes that he 
was scheduled to drive (often to the dismay of his fellow drivers). In their blos¬ 
soming social relationship, Wendy acquiesced to all his interests and demands. 
They dated for several months, and she eventually moved into his apartment. 

Joe hadn’t lost his intellectual curiosity or his passion for natural science. 
He was still fascinated by theoretical issues in chemistry, especially those related 
to the quality of the environment (our supply of air and water). Wendy encour¬ 
aged him to pursue these interests and was happy to give him plenty of time 
on his own to think and write papers. It is not clear whether this activity is best 
described as an eccentric hobby or the work of a dissident scholar who had been 
spumed and persecuted by his jealous peers. Joe certainly favored the latter 
explanation. Because he didn't have access to a lab, his papers were entirely the¬ 
oretical in nature. The quality of these papers remained unknown because they 
were never submitted to professional journals. 

Joe’s grandiosity was still readily apparent to anyone who met him, but his 
most pronounced paranoid thoughts, such as his concern about the balance in 
the chemistry lab, were in remission for several years. He privately viewed the 
grievous end of his professional career as the product of laboratory intrigue and 
professional jealousies, but he was no longer preoccupied with these thoughts. 
His competitive instincts were under control because he was not working in an 
intellectual environment. His self-esteem was no longer threatened on a daily 
basis by comparisons with other people in his field. 

Joe’s paranoid thoughts were suddenly rekindled by an unexpected news 
event. One day, while driving his cab, he heard on the radio that the Nobel Prize 
in chemistry had been awarded to a professor at the university where he had 
received his bachelor’s and doctoral degrees. The recipient, a faculty member 
in that department for 35 years, had been a member of Joe's dissertation 
committee when he was in graduate school. Everyone in his field considered this 
man to be a genius of enormous achievement. He was also known as a man who 
did not “suffer fools gladly” and could respond sharply when he disagreed with 
an idea. He had, in fact, criticized part of Joe’s dissertation plan in front of the 
other members of the committee. Although the man was only trying to be help¬ 
ful, Joe had felt enormous anger and embarrassment. Since that incident, Joe had 
always described this professor as “a simple-minded, unimaginative charlatan.” 



Chapter 18 Paranoid Personality Disorder 275 


No one else shared this view, but others hadn’t been able to change Joe’s bizarre 
opinion. Joe always considered his own mentor, a senior person who was also a 
Nobel Laureate in chemistry, to be far superior to this other man. 

The most shocking aspect of this news story, from Joe’s point of view, was 
the topic of the work for which the prize was awarded: atmospheric chemistry. 
This subject had been of great interest to Joe for many years. In fact, he had 
written two lengthy theoretical papers about it while he was still working for 
the drug company. Joe had presumably developed a revolutionary new theory 
regarding the ozone layer and the future of the Earth’s atmosphere. He believed 
that, if only anyone would listen, his ideas would dramatically affect the future 
of the human race. Unfortunately (from his point of view), most other scientists 
were too stupid to appreciate his ideas. Those who could understand were the 
people who plotted against him. 

Ruminating about the prize, Joe remembered that he had mailed copies of 
these papers to the chemistry department at his alma mater when he was leav¬ 
ing his job at the drug company and had been desperate for employment. He 
had applied for a postdoctoral position in another laboratory. Although he was 
always reluctant to share his ideas with others in the field, he had mailed copies 
of these papers in the hope of impressing the head of the lab. He hadn’t gotten 
the job. Surely, he reasoned, this other professor (who had now won the Nobel 
Prize) had obtained the papers, stolen Joe’s ideas, and gone on to conduct bril¬ 
liant research while pretending that the ideas were his own. Once again, Joe 
believed that he had been cheated—this time out of the world’s most prestigious 
scientific award. 

Unfortunately, little could be done. Joe complained bitterly and continu¬ 
ously to his girlfriend, who believed his story and was as sympathetic and sup¬ 
portive as she could be. He knew that he couldn't complain to any of his peers 
from graduate school or his former colleagues at the university. They hadn’t 
believed him before, and he was certain that they would not support him now. 
Joe wisely chose not to file any formal complaints with the university. He was 
quite upset about this story for several weeks, but he also had enough perspec¬ 
tive on his own suspicions to know that other people thought he was irrational. 
He resigned himself once again to living the life of an exile from the scientific 
community. 


Discussion 


Personality disorders (PDs) are defined in terms of stable, cross-situational pat¬ 
terns of behavior that lead to impairment in social and occupational function¬ 
ing or subjective distress. These response patterns are exhibited in a rigid and 
inflexible manner, despite their maladaptive consequences (Skodol, 2005; South, 
Oltmanns, & Krueger, 2011). The principal features of a paranoid personality 
are unwarranted suspicion and mistrust of other people. People with this PD 




276 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


are often seen by others as cold, guarded, and defensive; they refuse to accept 
blame, even if it is justified, and they tend to retaliate at the slightest provoca¬ 
tion. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR; APA, 
2000, p. 694) lists the following criteria for paranoid PD: 

1. A pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are 

interpreted as malevolent, beginning by early adulthood and present in a 

variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following: 

a. Suspects, without sufficient basis, that others are exploiting, harming, 
or deceiving him or her 

b. Is preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trustworthi¬ 
ness of friends or associates 

c. Is reluctant to confide in others because of unwarranted fear that the 
information will be used maliciously against him or her 

d. Reads hidden demeaning or threatening meanings into benign remarks 
or events 

e. Persistently bears grudges (e.g., is unforgiving of insults, injuries, or 
slights) 

f. Perceives attacks on his or her character or reputation that are not 
apparent to others and is quick to react angrily or to counterattack 

g. Has recurrent suspicions, without justification, regarding fidelity of 
spouse or sexual partner 

2 . Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a mood dis¬ 
order with psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder 

These characteristics are not limited to periods of acute disturbance; they are 
typical of the person’s behavior over a long period of time. 

Personality disorders are among the most controversial categories included 
in DSM-IV-TR (Krueger & Eaton, 2010; Skodol et al., 2011). Part of the con¬ 
troversy derives from a debate regarding personality traits and situational spe¬ 
cificity of behavior. Social-learning theorists have argued that human behavior 
is largely determined by the context in which it occurs and not by internal per¬ 
sonality characteristics. It has been demonstrated, however, that ratings of per¬ 
sonality traits are useful predictors of behavior, especially when the ratings are 
made by several observers, the observers are thoroughly familiar with the people 
who are being rated, observations are made on a number of occasions, and the 
ratings are made on dimensions that are publicly observable (Funder, 1999). 

Two other issues also contribute to the controversial status of the PDs. One 
involves reliability. For many years, interrater reliability for PDs was consider¬ 
ably lower than it was for many other disorders. This situation has improved, 
partly because of the introduction of structured interview schedules aimed spe¬ 
cifically at PDs. Fowest reliability is often found for paranoid PD, and higher 
reliability tends to be associated with antisocial PD. The results of several stud¬ 
ies indicate that PDs can be diagnosed reliably by trained clinicians (Widiger & 
Samuel, 2005). 



Chapter 18 Paranoid Personality Disorder 277 


Another issue that must be mentioned with regard to the PDs is the overlap 
between diagnostic categories (Grant, Stinson, Dawson, Chou, & Ruan, 2005; 
Khan, Jacobson, Gardner, Prescott, & Kendler, 2005). Many patients meet the 
criteria for more than one form of PD. Among people who meet the criteria for 
paranoid PD, the most frequent comorbid conditions are schizotypal, narcissis¬ 
tic, borderline, and avoidant PDs (Bernstein & Useda, 2007). Extensive over¬ 
lap among Axis II categories indicates that the specific types of PD listed in 
DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) may not be the most efficient or meaningful way to 
describe this particular type of abnormal behavior. 

Joe’s case illustrates the overlap among different types of PDs. In addition 
to paranoid PD, Joe also met the DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, p. 717) criteria for 
narcissistic PD, which requires that the person exhibit five (or more) of the fol¬ 
lowing features: 

1. Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements 
and talents, expects to be recognized as superior without commensurate 
achievements) 

2 . Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, 
beauty, or ideal love 

3. Believes that he or she is “special” and unique, and can only be under¬ 
stood by, or should associate with, other special or high-status people (or 
institutions) 

4 . Requires excessive admiration 

5 . Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially 
favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations) 

6. Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his 
or her own ends) 

7 . Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and 
needs of others 

8. Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her 

9 . Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes 

Joe’s inflated sense of his own intellectual abilities and scientific accomplish¬ 
ments clearly fits the pattern for narcissistic PD. He also exhibited the lack of 
empathy and feelings of entitlement that are described in these criteria. In 
addition to these characteristics, his behavior was arrogant and occasionally 
exploitative. 

The principal issue regarding differential diagnosis and paranoid PD con¬ 
cerns the distinction between this category and delusional disorder, in which 
the patients exhibit persistent persecutory delusions or delusional jealousy. 
Delusional disorder is listed on Axis I, whereas paranoid PD is listed on Axis II. 
The paranoid ideas in paranoid PDs are presumably not of sufficient severity 
to be considered delusional, but the criteria to be used in making this distinc¬ 
tion are not entirely clear. When does pervasive suspicion and mistrust become a 
paranoid belief? The two categories may be etiologically distinct, but it has not 



278 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


been demonstrated that they carry different treatment implications. DSM-IV-TR 
(APA, 2000) lists the categories separately, but the reliability and validity of the 
two categories remain open questions (Bernstein & Useda, 2007). 

Personality disorders seem to be among the most common forms of abnor¬ 
mal behavior. It is difficult to provide empirical support for that claim, how¬ 
ever, because the existing epidemiological data are inconsistent. The overall 
lifetime prevalence of Axis II disorders (i.e., having at least one type of PD) 
varies between 10 and 12% in samples of adults who are not in treatment for 
a mental disorder (Trull, Jahng, Tomko, Wood, & Sher, 2010). Rates for spe¬ 
cific disorders vary from one study to the next, depending on the type of assess¬ 
ment procedure that was used and the way in which the sample of subjects was 
identified. Several studies that used structured interviews with community resi¬ 
dents have reported a lifetime prevalence of approximately 1% for paranoid PD 
(Lenzenweger, 2008). 

Follow-up studies indicate that delusional disorder and paranoid personal¬ 
ity characteristics are typically long-term problems that change relatively lit¬ 
tle over time (Seivewright, Tyrer, & Johnson, 2002; Stephens, Richard, & 
McHugh, 2000). For many patients, their paranoid beliefs become more pro¬ 
nounced over time. 

Psychological Theories 

Several theories have been proposed that attempt to account for the development 
of paranoid ideas (Bentall & Taylor, 2006; Miller, Useda, Trull, Burr, & Minks- 
Brown, 2001). Perhaps the earliest hypothesis regarding paranoia was suggested 
by Freud (1909, 1925) in his analysis of the memoirs of Daniel Paul Schreber, 
an accomplished lawyer who had spent close to 14 years of his life in mental 
hospitals (Gottlieb, 2006). Schreber’s problems centered on an elaborate set 
of persecutory and grandiose delusions, including the notion that he would be 
transformed into a woman. Following this transformation, Schreber believed that 
he would become God’s mate and that they would produce a better and healthier 
race of people. Freud argued that the content of Schreber’s delusions revealed 
the presence of an unconscious homosexual wish-fantasy. This hidden desire 
was taken to be the core of the conflict motivating paranoid ideas. The proc¬ 
ess presumably begins with the unacceptable thought that “I (a man) love him 
(a man).” To avoid the anxiety associated with the conscious realization of this 
idea, the thought is transformed to its opposite: “I do not love him—I hate him 
because he persecutes me.” 

At least two aspects of Joe’s case might be consistent with this psychody¬ 
namic model. He occasionally made comments about other men’s sexual orien¬ 
tation, particularly when he was trying to embarrass them. We might infer from 
these remarks that he was concerned about his own sexual desires, but we do 
not have any direct evidence to validate this conclusion. His only sexual expe¬ 
riences had been with women, and he did not express ambivalence about his 



Chapter 18 Paranoid Personality Disorder 279 


interest in women. Joe’s panic attacks might also fit into Freud’s model, which 
suggests that Joe was using the defense mechanism of projection to avoid the 
anxiety associated with unconscious homosexual impulses. It could be argued 
that the panic attacks represented a spilling over of excess anxiety that was not 
being handled efficiently by projection and other secondary defense mecha¬ 
nisms such as repression. Once again, the model seems plausible, but it cannot 
be tested directly. 

An alternative explanation for the development of paranoid delusions was 
proposed by Cameron (1959). He argued that predelusional patients are anx¬ 
ious, fearful, socially withdrawn, and reluctant to confide in other people. This 
suggestion is consistent with recent evidence indicating that people with para¬ 
noid PD are more likely than other people to have experienced anxiety disor¬ 
ders when they were children (Esterberg, Golding, & Walker, 2010; Kasen et ah, 
2001). Cameron went on to point out that social isolation leads to a deficiency 
in social skills. In particular, he argued that predelusional patients are less adept 
than others in understanding the motivations of other people. They are therefore 
more likely to misinterpret other people’s behavior and, having done so, are also 
less able to elicit discontinuing evidence from their peers. From time to time, 
most of us have thought that someone else was angry with us or trying to do 
us harm when, in fact, they were not. We usually come to realize our mistake 
by talking to our friends about what happened. Cameron’s argument was that 
predelusional patients are even more likely to misinterpret other people's behav¬ 
ior and, given an instance of misinterpretation, are also less able to correct the 
mistake through interaction with other people. According to Cameron’s hypoth¬ 
esis, this cycle is perpetuated by the paranoid person’s subsequent behavior. 
For example, someone who believes that his relatives are plotting against him 
is likely to behave in a hostile, defensive manner when his relatives are present. 
They, in turn, may become angry and irritable in response to his apparently 
unprovoked hostility, thus confirming the paranoid person’s original suspicion 
that they are out to get him. Thus, Cameron’s formulation allows for a complex 
interaction of personality traits, social skills, and environmental events. 

Several elements of Cameron’s theory seem applicable in Joe’s case. He 
was not particularly withdrawn and fearful, but he was reluctant to confide 
in other people. He tended to be a “loner” and felt awkward in social situa¬ 
tions such as parties. His habit of laughing at people and provoking arguments 
would indicate that he was not sensitive to their feelings and point of view, as 
suggested by Cameron. Perhaps most important is the effect that Joe’s behav¬ 
ior had on other people. He was completely unable to consider the possibility 
that other people talked about him and avoided him because he was initially 
hostile and belligerent. 

Colby (1977) proposed an information-processing view of paranoid think¬ 
ing in which the principal feature is sensitivity to shame and humiliation. The 
model focuses exclusively on verbal interactions. In the “paranoid mode” of 
processing, people presumably scan linguistic input for comments or questions 



280 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


that might lead to the experience of shame (defined as “a rise in the truth value 
of a belief that the self is inadequate”). Faced with the threat of humiliation, 
the person in the paranoid mode responds by denying personal inadequacy and 
blaming others. The theory implies that paranoia is associated with low self¬ 
esteem and that episodes of paranoid behavior may be triggered by environ¬ 
mental circumstances that increase the threat of shame (e.g., failure, ridicule). 
Other negative emotions, most notably fear and anger, are presumably not likely 
to elicit paranoid responses. Some support for this hypothesis comes from the 
observation that people who are paranoid produce low scores on standard meas¬ 
ures of self-esteem. Furthermore, when they are studied over time, a decrease in 
self-esteem is typically followed quickly by an increase in paranoia (Thewissen, 
Bentall, Lecomte, van Os, & Myin-Germeys, 2008). 

Colby’s model provides a plausible explanation for Joe’s problems at the 
drug company and the university laboratory; his paranoid comments provided 
a rationale for his own failure to succeed. Joe was a brilliant chemist, but he 
had not developed a successful, independent line of research. The limitations of 
his work were particularly evident after he had been allowed some independence 
at the drug company. Joe’s supervisors finally became so disappointed with his 
progress that he was reassigned to more structured projects. Shortly after this 
demotion, his suspicions began to reach delusional proportions. Colby would 
probably argue that Joe chose to blame his colleagues’ interference for failures 
that would otherwise indicate his own professional inadequacy. The shame- 
humiliation model also accounts for Joe’s later improvement following his 
change of occupations. As a cab driver, Joe was removed from the field of pro¬ 
fessional competition in which he was continually exposed to threatening mes¬ 
sages. He was reasonably successful as a cab driver, and his self-esteem did not 
suffer in comparison to the people with whom he usually interacted. There was 
therefore little need for him to behave in a hostile or defensive manner. His para¬ 
noid beliefs did emerge again, however, when he heard about the professor who 
won the Nobel Prize. This man’s success may have, once again, reminded him of 
his own disappointing career. 

Treatment 

Psychotherapy can be beneficial for patients with various kinds of PD (Beck, 
Freeman, & Davis, 2004; Zanarini, 2009). Unfortunately, relatively little evi¬ 
dence is available with regard to the effects of treatment for paranoid PD. 
Clinical experience suggests that therapy is often of limited value with paranoid 
patients because it is so difficult to establish a trusting therapeutic relationship 
with them (McMurran, Huband, & Overton, 2010; Williams, 2010). Joe’s case is 
a good example. He expected the therapist to help him cope with his anxiety but 
was unwilling to discuss his problems at anything other than a superficial level. 
This defensive attitude would hamper most attempts to engage in traditional, 



Chapter 18 Paranoid Personality Disorder 281 


insight-oriented psychotherapy. The client-centered approach developed by Carl 
Rogers (2007) might be more effective with paranoid clients because it fosters a 
nonthreatening environment. The therapist must also be careful to avoid the dis¬ 
play of excessive friendliness or sympathy, however, because it might be inter¬ 
preted as an attempt to deceive the patient (Akhtar, 1992). From Colby’s point 
of view, Rogers’s emphasis on the provision of accurate empathy and uncondi¬ 
tional positive regard would also be likely to bolster the paranoid’s fragile self¬ 
esteem and thereby reduce his or her sensitivity to potential embarrassment. 
Unfortunately, there are no data available to support this type of speculation. 

Cameron’s model might lead to a more directive form of intervention 
focused on the development of specific social skills. For example, various situ¬ 
ations might be constructed to demonstrate to the client the manner in which 
his or her behavior affects other people. Similarly, the therapist might practice 
various social interactions with the client in an effort to improve his or her abil¬ 
ity to discuss initial social impressions. It might also be possible to improve the 
client’s ability to read social cues. This behavioral approach would be used in an 
effort to expand the client’s repertoire of appropriate social behaviors so that the 
client could respond more flexibly to specific situational demands. 

Cognitive therapy also has interesting applications for the treatment of para¬ 
noid patients. The central assumption of this approach is that PDs are associated 
with deeply ingrained, maladaptive beliefs (Beck et al., 2004). In the case of 
paranoid PD, these include thoughts such as “people cannot be trusted” and “if 
I get close to people, they will find out my weaknesses and hurt me.” The thera¬ 
pist works with the client to identify and recognize these cognitive distortions 
and their influence on the person’s behavior. The paranoid person is encouraged 
to test the validity of these maladaptive thoughts. Over time, the goal is to help 
the person learn to replace them with more adaptive thoughts and more accurate 
attributions (Kinderman, 2001). 

When paranoid ideas reach delusional proportions, the use of antipsychotic 
medication may also be considered. These drugs are effective in the treatment 
of schizophrenia, but their effect has usually been measured in terms of global 
improvement ratings; it is not clear if they have an equally positive effect on all 
of the symptoms of schizophrenia. In fact, a few studies have examined changes 
in specific symptoms and concluded that antipsychotic drugs are most likely 
to have a positive effect on auditory hallucinations and disorganized speech. 
Paranoid delusions are among the least-responsive symptoms (Manschreck, 
1992). Thus, in the absence of other schizophrenic symptoms, patients with par¬ 
anoid delusions are not likely to benefit from drug treatment. 



282 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Discussion Questions 


1. Other than being suspicious and sensitive to criticism, what are the most 
important characteristics of paranoid people? 

2. Joe’s friends and coworkers would have described him as being paranoid. But 
he would not describe himself in that way. He would have said that he was 
angry (because people were making trouble for him). If other people saw him 
differently than he saw himself, what problems are raised for the use of self- 
report instruments in the assessment of paranoid PD? 

3. What is the difference between paranoid PD and a paranoid delusion? Do 
you think that, at some point, Joe might have been considered psychotic (i.e., 
delusional)? 

4 . If you were Dr. Fein, the psychiatrist with whom Joe consulted briefly, what 
could you have done (if anything) to persuade Joe to remain in treatment? 
Would it have made any difference in his long-term outcome if he had stayed 
in treatment? 




CHAPTER 19 


Borderline Personality Disorder 


Amanda Siegel was 22 years old when she reluctantly agreed to interrupt her 
college semester and admit herself for the eighth time to a psychiatric hospital. 
Her psychologist, Dr. Swenson, and her psychiatrist, Dr. Smythe, believed that 
neither psychotherapy nor medication was controlling her symptoms and 
that continuing outpatient treatment would be too risky. Amanda was experienc¬ 
ing brief but terrifying episodes in which she felt that her body was not real. 
She sometimes reacted by cutting herself with a knife to feel pain, so she would 
feel real. During the first part of the admission interview at the hospital, Amanda 
angrily denied that she had done anything self-destructive. The anger dissolved, 
however, and she was soon in tears as she recounted her fears that she would 
fail her midterm exams and be expelled from college. The admitting psychia¬ 
trist noted that at times Amanda behaved in a flirtatious manner, asking inappro¬ 
priately personal questions such as whether any of the psychiatrist’s girlfriends 
were in the hospital. 

When she arrived at the inpatient psychiatric unit, Amanda once again 
became angry. She protested loudly, using obscene and abusive language when 
the nurse searched her luggage for illegal drugs and sharp objects, even though 
Amanda was very familiar with this routine procedure. These impulsive out¬ 
bursts of anger were characteristic of Amanda. She would often express anger at 
an intensity level that was out of proportion to the situation. When she became 
this angry, she would typically do or say something that she later regretted, such 
as verbally abusing a close friend or breaking a prized possession. Despite the 
negative consequences of these actions and Amanda’s ensuing guilt and regret, 
she was unable to stop losing control of her anger. That same day, she filed a 
“3-day notice,” a written statement expressing an intention to leave the hospi¬ 
tal within 72 hours. Dr. Swenson told Amanda that if she did not agree to stay 
voluntarily, he would initiate legal proceedings for her involuntary commitment 
on the grounds that she was a threat to herself. Two days later, she retracted the 
3-day notice, and her anger seemed to subside. 


283 



284 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Over the next 2 weeks, Amanda appeared to be doing quite well. Despite 
some complaints of feeling depressed, she was always well dressed and 
groomed, in contrast to many of the other patients. Except for occasional epi¬ 
sodes when she became verbally abusive and slammed doors, Amanda looked 
and acted like a staff member. She adopted a “therapist” role with the other 
patients, listening intently to their problems and suggesting solutions. She would 
often serve as a spokesperson for the more disgruntled patients, expressing their 
concerns and complaints to the administrators of the treatment unit. With her 
therapist’s help, Amanda wrote a contract stating that she would not hurt herself 
and that she would notify staff members if she began to have thoughts of doing 
so. Because her safety was no longer as big of a concern, she was allowed a 
number of passes off the unit with other patients and friends. 

Amanda became particularly attached to several staff members and arranged 
one-to-one talks with them as often as possible. She used these talks to flatter 
and compliment the staff members and tell them that they were one of the few 
who truly understood her and could help her, and she also complained to them 
about alleged incompetence and lack of professionalism among other staff mem¬ 
bers. Some of these staff members Amanda was attached to had trouble con¬ 
fronting her when she broke the rules. For example, when she was late returning 
from a pass off grounds, it was often overlooked. If she was confronted, espe¬ 
cially by someone with whom she felt she had a special relationship, she would 
feel betrayed and, as if an emotional switch had flipped, would lash out angrily 
and accuse that person of being “just like the rest of them.” 

By the end of the third week of hospitalization, Amanda no longer appeared 
to be in acute distress, and the staff began to plan for her discharge. At about this 
time, Amanda began to drop hints in her therapy sessions with Dr. Swenson that 
she had been withholding some kind of secret. Dr. Swenson addressed this issue 
in therapy and encouraged her to be more open and direct if there was some¬ 
thing she needed to talk about. She then revealed that since her second day in 
the hospital, she had been receiving illegal street drugs from two friends who 
visited her. Besides occasionally using the drugs herself, Amanda had been giv¬ 
ing them to other patients on the unit. This situation was quickly brought to the 
attention of all the other patients on the unit in a meeting called by Dr. Swenson. 
During the meeting, Amanda protested that the other patients had forced her to 
bring them drugs and that she actually had no choice in the matter. Dr. Swenson 
didn't believe Amanda’s explanation and instead thought that Amanda had found 
it intolerable to be denied approval and found it impossible to say no. 

Soon after this meeting, Amanda experienced another episode of feeling as 
if she were unreal and cut herself a number of times across her wrists with a 
soda can she had broken in half. The cuts were deep enough to draw blood but 
were not life threatening. In contrast to previous incidents, she did not try to hide 
her injuries, and several staff members therefore concluded that Amanda was 
exaggerating the severity of her problems to avoid discharge from the hospital. 
The members of the treatment team then met to decide the best course of action. 



Chapter 19 Borderline Personality Disorder 285 


Not everyone agreed about Amanda’s motivation for cutting herself. She was 
undoubtedly self-destructive and possibly suicidal and, therefore, needed further 
hospitalization. But she had been sabotaging the treatment of other patients and 
couldn’t be trusted to keep from doing so again. With members of her treatment 
team split on whether or not Amanda should be allowed to remain in the hospital, 
designing a coherent treatment program would prove difficult at best. 


Social History 


Amanda was the older of two daughters born to a suburban middle-class fam¬ 
ily. She was 2 years old when her sister Megan was born. Amanda’s mother and 
father divorced 4 years later, leaving the children in their mother’s custody. The 
family had significant financial difficulties because Amanda’s father provided 
little child support. He remarried soon afterward and was generally unavailable 
to his original family. He never remembered the children on birthdays or holi¬ 
days. When Amanda was 7 years old, her mother began working as a waitress. 
Neighbors would check in on Amanda and Megan after school, but the children 
were left largely unattended until their mother returned home from work in the 
evening. So at a very early age, Amanda assumed a caregiver role toward her 
younger sister. Over the next few years, Amanda took on a number of house¬ 
hold responsibilities, such as regular meal preparation and shopping, which were 
more appropriate for a teenager. She did not complain about the situation and 
behaved well at home and in school. However, she remained distressed about the 
absence of her father. Had she somehow had something to do with the divorce? 
How much better would her life have been if her father were with her? 

When Amanda was 13 years old, her mother married a man she had been 
dating for about 3 months. The man, Arthur Siegel, had a 16-year-old son named 
Mike, who joined the household on a somewhat sporadic basis. Mike had been 
moving back and forth between his parents’ houses since their divorce 4 years 
earlier. His mother had legal custody but could not manage his abusive and 
aggressive behaviors, so she frequently sent him to live with his father for sev¬ 
eral weeks or months at a time. Because Amanda still secretly hoped that her 
parents would remarry, she resented the intrusion of her stepfather and step¬ 
brother into the household and was upset when her mother changed their last 
name to Siegel. She also resented the loss of some of her caregiving responsibili¬ 
ties, which were now shared with her mother and stepfather. 

Soon after her mother and stepfather married, Mike began sexually abusing 
Amanda. Mike told her that it was important for her to learn about sex and, after 
raping her, threatened that if she ever told anyone, he would tell all her friends 
that she was a “slut.” When this occurred, she had not been sexually active with 
anyone. This pattern of abuse continued whenever Mike was living with his 
father. Even though Amanda was traumatized by the abuse, she felt unable to 
refuse or to tell anyone what was happening. 




286 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Amanda’s behavior began to deteriorate. She had been doing very well 
academically in the seventh grade and then began to skip classes. Her grades fell 
precipitously over the course of a semester, and she began spending time with 
peers who were experimenting with alcohol and street drugs. Amanda became 
a frequent user of these drugs, even though she experienced some frightening 
symptoms after taking them (e.g., vivid visual hallucinations and strong feel¬ 
ings of paranoia). By the end of the eighth grade, Amanda’s grades were so poor 
and her school attendance so erratic that she was recommended for a psycho¬ 
logical evaluation to see if she should be held back for a year. Amanda was given 
a fairly extensive battery of intelligence, achievement, and projective tests. She 
was found to be extremely intelligent, with an IQ of 130. Projective test results 
(Rorschach, Thematic Apperception Test) were interpreted as reflecting a sig¬ 
nificant degree of underlying anger, which was believed to be contributing to 
Amanda’s behavioral problems. Of more concern was that she gave a number of 
bizarre and confused responses on the projective tests. For example, when peo¬ 
ple report what they “see” in the famous Rorschach inkblots, it is usually easy 
for the tester to share the client’s perception. Several of Amanda’s responses, 
however, just didn’t match any discernible features of the inkblots. The psychol¬ 
ogist, although having no knowledge of Amanda’s home life, suspected that her 
problems may have reflected her difficulties at home and recommended family 
therapy at a local community mental-health center. 

Several months later, Amanda and her mother and sister had their first 
appointment with a social worker at the mental-health center. Mr. Siegel was dis¬ 
trustful of the prospect of therapy and refused to attend, stating, “No shrink is 
going to mess with my head!” During the therapy, the social worker first took 
a detailed family history. She noticed that Amanda was very guarded and was 
reluctant to share any feelings about or perceptions of the events of her life. 
The next phase of family therapy was more educational in nature, consisting of 
teaching Mrs. Siegel more effective methods of discipline and helping Amanda 
to see the importance of attending school on a regular basis. 

Family therapy ended after 3 months with only marginal success. Although 
Mrs. Siegel had been highly motivated and diligently followed the therapist’s 
suggestions, Amanda remained a reluctant participant in the therapy and was 
unwilling to open up. She never disclosed the sexual abuse she was experienc¬ 
ing. She felt depressed and guilty, with a very low opinion of herself. 

When Amanda was 15 years old, her mother and Mr. Siegel divorced, 
ending the sexual abuse. When Amanda began high school, she continued her 
association with the same peer group she had known in junior high. They all 
regularly abused drugs. Amanda had her first experiences of feeling unreal and 
dissociated from her surroundings while intoxicated. She felt as though she were 
ghostlike, that she was transparent and could pass through objects or people. 

Amanda also began a pattern of promiscuous sexual activity. She felt guilty 
for engaging in sex, but, as happened when she was being abused by her step¬ 
brother, she was unable to refuse sexual advances, from either men or women. 



Chapter 19 Borderline Personality Disorder 287 


She was particularly vulnerable when under the influence of drugs and would, 
under some circumstances, participate in sadomasochistic sexual activities. For 
example, Amanda was sometimes physically abused, such as being punched in 
the face, by her sexual partners while having sex. She didn’t protest and, after a 
while, expected such violence. Sometimes Amanda’s sexual partners would ask 
her to inflict some kind of pain on them during sexual activity, for example, bit¬ 
ing during fellatio or digging her nails into her partner’s buttocks. Even though 
these activities left Amanda with a sense of shame and guilt, she felt unable 
either to set limits or break off these relationships. 

By the time Amanda was 16 years old, she never wanted to be alone. She 
was often bored and depressed, particularly if she had no plans for spending 
time with anyone else. An important incident occurred at about this time. One 
night while cruising in a car with friends, they were pulled over by the police 
because the car had been stolen by one of her friends. Street drugs were also 
found in the car. Amanda claimed that she had not known that the car was stolen. 
The judge who heard the case was concerned about the progressive deterioration 
in Amanda’s academic performance and social functioning. Because previous 
outpatient treatment had failed, he recommended inpatient treatment to help her 
gain some control over her impulses and prevent future legal and psychological 
problems. Amanda was being offered a choice between being prosecuted as an 
accessory to car theft and for possession of illegal substances, or signing into a 
mental hospital. Reluctantly, she chose the hospitalization. 

During this first hospitalization, Amanda’s mood swings seemed to inten¬ 
sify. She vacillated between outbursts of anger and feelings of emptiness and 
depression. She showed signs of depression, such as lack of appetite and insom¬ 
nia. Antidepressant medication was tried for several weeks but was ineffective. 
She spent most of her time in the hospital with a male patient. To any observer, 
their relationship would not have seemed to have a romantic component. They 
watched TV together, ate together, and played various games that were available 
on the ward. After only a couple of meetings with him, Amanda had revealed the 
most intimate details of her life. There was no physical contact or romantic talk. 
Nonetheless, Amanda idealized him and had fantasies of marrying him. When he 
was discharged from the hospital and broke off the relationship, Amanda had her 
first nondrug-induced episode of feeling unreal (derealization) and subsequently 
cut herself with a kitchen knife in order to feel real. She began making suicide 
threats over the telephone to the former patient, saying that if he did not take 
her back, she would kill herself. She was given a short trial of an antipsychotic 
medication, which was also ineffective. 

While in the hospital, Amanda started individual psychotherapy, which was 
continued after her discharge. The therapy was psychodynamically oriented and 
focused on helping Amanda to establish a trusting relationship with a caring 
adult (her therapist). The therapist also attempted to help Amanda understand 
the intrapsychic conflicts that had started very early in her life. For example, the 
therapist hypothesized that her biological parents’ divorce, and Amanda’s idea 



288 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


that she was somehow responsible for it, led to her fear of being abandoned 
by people who were important to her. One of the therapist’s goals was to show 
Amanda that he would still be available and would not leave her regardless of 
how she behaved. It was hoped that this would help Amanda to feel more secure 
in her interpersonal relationships. 

Despite these therapy sessions, which she thought were helpful, Amanda 
continued to experience problems with drug abuse, promiscuity, depression, 
feelings of boredom, episodes of intense anger, suicide threats, derealization, 
and self-injurious behavior, such as cutting herself. Several hospitalizations were 
required when Amanda’s threats and self-injurious behavior became particularly 
intense or frequent. These were usually precipitated by stressful interpersonal 
events, such as breaking up with a boyfriend, or discussing emotionally charged 
issues, such as the sexual abuse by Mike, in psychotherapy. Most of the hospital¬ 
izations were relatively brief, lasting 1 to 2 weeks, and Amanda was discharged 
after the precipitating crisis had been resolved. She received a number of diag¬ 
noses during these hospitalizations, including brief psychotic disorder, major 
depressive episode, atypical anxiety disorder, adjustment disorder with mixed 
emotional features, substance-use disorder, adjustment disorder with mixed dis¬ 
turbances of emotion and conduct, and borderline personality disorder. 

During one of these hospitalizations, Amanda decided that she wanted to 
change therapists, and after careful consideration, her treatment team decided 
to grant her request. When Amanda was 19 years old, she was introduced to 
Dr. Swenson, a psychologist, and began individual behaviorally oriented 
psychotherapy. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


As opposed to Amanda’s previous therapist. Dr. Swenson’s approach was more 
focused and directive, concentrating on helping her solve specific problems and 
behave in ways that would be more personally rewarding. At the same time, 
Dr. Swenson did not try to force change on her. He was empathic and accept¬ 
ing and gave her the opportunity to identify areas that she wanted to work on. 
Over a number of sessions, Amanda and Dr. Swenson identified several problem 
areas: (a) lack of direction or goals, (b) feelings of depression, (c) poor impulse 
control, and (d) excessive and poorly controlled anger. Specific interventions 
were designed for each of these areas. Concerning the first problem, Amanda 
had done so poorly in her schoolwork and was so far behind that going back to 
high school to graduate was not realistic. Amanda therefore decided to study 
to take an examination for a General Equivalency Diploma (GED), which would 
then allow her to pursue further education or job training. Amanda passed the 
exam after studying for approximately 4 months. This success enhanced her 
self-esteem because she had never before maintained the self-discipline neces¬ 
sary to accomplish any but the most short-term goals. 




Chapter 19 Borderline Personality Disorder 289 


Because antidepressants had not helped in the past, her depression was treated 
with cognitive therapy based on the assumption that people’s thoughts can influence 
their mood. To help Amanda become more aware of the thoughts that might make 
her more vulnerable to depression, she was asked to keep a written record of her 
mood three times daily. Next to her mood, she wrote down what she was think¬ 
ing, particularly those thoughts that involved predictions about how a given situ¬ 
ation might turn out. Through this exercise Amanda came to realize that she often 
made negative predictions about how events would turn out and subsequently felt 
sad and depressed. 

To learn to restructure or “talk back” to these negative thoughts, Amanda 
was given another exercise. When faced with an anxiety-provoking situa¬ 
tion, Amanda was asked to write three different scenarios for the situation: 

(a) a worst-case scenario in which everything that could go wrong did go wrong, 

(b) a best-case scenario in which events turned out just as she wanted, and 

(c) a scenario that she believed was most likely to occur. The actual outcome 
was then compared with the three different predicted outcomes. More often than 
not, the actual events were markedly different from either the best-case or worst- 
case predictions. With time, this exercise helped Amanda control some of her 
more negative thoughts and replace them with more adaptive and realistic ways 
of thinking that were based on her own experiences. 

One example of the cognitive therapy had to do with Amanda’s difficulties 
keeping a job. She held numerous part-time jobs that lasted for 1 or 2 months 
before she quit or was fired for not showing up to work. She typically believed 
that people at work, especially her supervisors, did not like her to begin with and 
were looking for excuses to fire her. After the smallest of negative interactions 
with someone at work, she assumed that she was about to be fired and stopped 
showing up to work, creating a self-fulfilling prophecy. Through monitoring her 
mood, she came to see that the predominant emotion she experienced in these 
situations was fear that she would be rejected by either her coworkers or supervi¬ 
sors. To prevent that, she typically rejected them first. After Amanda obtained a 
part-time job in a supermarket, her therapist had her write out the three scenarios 
mentioned, prior to actually starting work. Her scenarios were 

[worst case] I’ll show up to work and nobody will like me. Nobody will 
show me how to do my job, and they will probably make fun of me 
because I’m new there. I’ll probably quit after one day. 

[best case] This will be a job that I can finally do well. It will be the 
kind of work 1 have always wanted, and I’ll be promoted quickly and 
earn a high salary. Everyone at work will like me. 

[most likely] I’m new at work, but everyone else was new at one time, 
too. Some people may like me, and some may not, but that’s the way 
it is with everyone. Some conflict with other people is inevitable. I can 



290 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


still do my job even if everyone does not like me. One bad day at work 

does not mean I have to quit. 

She was encouraged to rehearse mentally the “most likely” scenario daily, 
especially when she felt like quitting. This helped her to keep the part-time job 
in the supermarket for 18 months, substantially longer than she had kept previ¬ 
ous jobs. 

Amanda had a number of problems with impulsiveness, drug abuse, self- 
mutilation, promiscuity, and anger. Dr. Swenson convinced her to join Narcotics 
Anonymous (NA), a nonprofessional self-help group for drug addicts based on 
the same principles as Alcoholics Anonymous. Whenever she had an impulse to 
use drugs, she was to use a technique called time delay. This involves a com¬ 
mitment not to use drugs for at least 15 minutes and during that time to engage 
in an alternative activity. This alternative activity could be telephoning another 
member of NA for help in controlling the impulse to use drugs. A similar 
approach was taken with Amanda’s self-mutilating behaviors; she was instructed 
to telephone Dr. Swenson or go to a hospital emergency room if she thought she 
could not control the impulse on her own. Her anger was problematic because 
she impulsively acted it out, so this was handled with similar procedures. 
Dr. Swenson encouraged Amanda to see anger not as a negative emotion but 
as a positive emotion that becomes destructive only when it is too intense. He 
then taught her time-delay procedures to help her wait before expressing anger. 
During the waiting period, the intensity of the emotion declined, and she had an 
opportunity to think over different ways of dealing with the situation, helping to 
result in a more appropriate expression of anger. 

Amanda made noticeable progress over the first few months of therapy with 
Dr. Swenson, showing a marked decline in her symptoms. She felt optimistic for 
the first time in a long while. However, this optimism soon deteriorated in the 
face of conflicts at home. For example, Amanda did not want to help maintain 
the household, either financially or by doing work around the house. She insisted 
that it was her mother’s responsibility to take care of her. She also wanted her 
boyfriends to be able to spend the night with her, which her mother would not 
allow. Amanda’s mother then asked her to move out of the house, but Amanda 
refused. Instead, she threatened suicide, superficially cut her wrists with a razor 
blade, and had to be rehospitalized. Amanda followed this same pattern over the 
next few years, making apparent gains in therapy for a month or so and then fall¬ 
ing back in the face of interpersonal conflict. Each time her problems returned, 
they seemed increasingly stressful for Amanda because she usually came to 
believe during her periods of relative stability that her problems had been “cured.” 

When Amanda was 22 years old, she decided to attend college on a full¬ 
time basis while living at home. Dr. Swenson was opposed to this because 
Amanda had not shown enough psychological stability to complete even a 
semester of college, let alone a degree program. She went to college anyway 
and soon became sexually involved with another student. As with previous 



Chapter 19 Borderline Personality Disorder 291 


relationships, Amanda idealized this boyfriend and became dependent on him. 
She had to be the sole focus of his attention and couldn’t tolerate the times when 
they were apart. After an argument in which Amanda smashed plates and glasses 
on the floor, her boyfriend left her. Amanda once again became suicidal and self¬ 
destructive. This episode led to the hospitalization described at the beginning of 
this chapter. 

Amanda’s treatment team at the hospital noted that none of the therapeutic 
interventions attempted with her (e.g., medication, insight-oriented psychotherapy, 
behavior therapy) had had any lasting impact. She had a poor employment history 
and showed little evidence that she would be able to support herself independently 
in the foreseeable future. It was also feared that she might continue to deteriorate, 
perhaps winding up in a state hospital on a long-term basis. It was decided that 
Dr. Swenson needed help in working with her, especially because her symptoms 
tended to worsen after dealing with difficult issues in therapy. She was referred to 
a day-treatment program at a local hospital, where she would have regular access 
to staff members who could provide therapy and support, while living outside the 
hospital and possibly working part time at an entry-level unskilled job. The treat¬ 
ment team realized that it would require a great deal of work to convince Amanda 
to accept these recommendations because accepting them would be an admission 
that she was more seriously disturbed than she cared to admit. Even if she did fol¬ 
low the recommendations, Amanda’s prognosis was guarded. 


Discussion 


As an Axis II diagnosis in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-1V-TR\ APA, 2000), borderline personality describes a set of 
inflexible and maladaptive traits that characterize a person’s long-term func¬ 
tioning. People with borderline personality disorder (BPD) have instability in 
relationships, behavior, mood, and self-image (Sanislow, Grilo, & McGlashen, 
2000). For example, attitudes and feelings toward others may vary considera¬ 
bly and inexplicably over short periods of time. Emotions are also erratic and 
can shift abruptly, particularly to anger. People with BPD are likely to experi¬ 
ence episodes of rage that are triggered by perceptions that important others 
are being rejecting or withholding (Berenson, Downey, Rafaeli, Coifman, & 
Paquin, 2011). A key feature of the disorder is emotional dysregulation, includ¬ 
ing difficulty understanding, being aware of, and accepting one’s emotions; poor 
strategies for managing one’s emotions; and avoidance of situations that elicit 
emotional distress (Gratz, Rosenthal, Tull, Lejuez, & Gunderson, 2006). They 
are hypersensitive to negative emotion and focus on their bad feelings, and 
this exacerbates the intensity of the negative experience and puts them at risk 
for engaging in some extreme behavior, such as substance abuse or self-injury, 
to distract them from these feelings (Selby, Anestis, Bender, & Joiner, 2009). 
Amanda certainly had these difficulties and struggled to cope with and tolerate 




292 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


her own feelings. If she suspected that a situation would lead to her emotional 
distress, such as fearing that people at work did not like her, then she would 
avoid going back to work. 

People with BPD are argumentative and irritable. Their unpredictable and 
impulsive behavior, such as suicide attempts, gambling, spending, sex, and eating 
sprees, is potentially self-damaging. They have not developed a clear and coherent 
sense of self and remain uncertain about their values, loyalties, and choice of career. 
They cannot bear to be alone and have fears of abandonment. They tend to have a 
series of intense relationships that are usually stormy and short-lived, alternating 
between idealization (the other person is perfect and can do no wrong) and devalu¬ 
ation (the other person is horrible, worthless). They tend to alternatively pursue and 
avoid interpersonal connectedness, both seeking reassurance from others and pulling 
away to avoid painful abandonment (Russell, Moskowitz, Zuroff, Sookman, & Paris, 
2007). Subject to chronic feelings of depression and emptiness, they make manipu¬ 
lative attempts at suicide. Paranoid ideation and dissociative symptoms may appear 
during periods of high stress. Amanda’s interpersonal relationships were both intense 
and unstable. She was very impulsive, could not control her anger, and had an unsta¬ 
ble self-image. She clearly met the diagnostic criteria for BPD. 

Originally, the diagnosis implied that the person was on the borderline 
between neurosis and psychosis, but the term no longer has this connotation. 
BPD has a lifetime prevalence of 5.9% and is equally common among men and 
women (Grant et ah, 2008). Though the DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) reported 75% 
of those diagnosed with the disorder are women, this is likely due to the greater 
numbers of women seeking treatment (Skodol & Bender, 2003). 

BPD often occurs with other disorders, especially major depression, eating 
disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, and substance abuse (Lieb, Zanarini, 
Schmahl, Linehan, & Bohus, 2004). On several occasions, Amanda met the 
diagnostic criteria for an episode of major depression with depressed mood, 
suicidal thoughts, insomnia, poor appetite, and feelings of self-reproach and 
guilt. About 75% of those diagnosed with BPD attempt suicide, and about 10% 
eventually do commit suicide (Black, Blum, Pfohl, & Hale, 2004). Self-injury 
may serve as punishment for the patient’s perceived flaws or as a way of elicit¬ 
ing help from others (Critchfield, Levy, Clarkin, & Kernberg, 2008). BPD, like 
the other personality disorders, has high levels of comorbidity with several other 
personality disorders, including antisocial, histrionic, narcissistic, and schizo¬ 
typal (Becker, Grilo, Edell, & McGlashen, 2000). 

Etiological Considerations 

There is very strong evidence that environmental factors, particularly related 
to childhood family functioning, are related to BPD (Bandelow et al., 2005). 
Compared with healthy controls, patients with the disorder were much more 
likely to report histories of childhood physical and sexual abuse, particularly by 
family members but not strangers. Specifically, trauma that involves betrayal by 



Chapter 1 9 Borderline Personality Disorder 293 


a trusted person is linked to the development of borderline symptoms (Kaehler 
& Freyd, 2009). People with BPD describe their childhood family environ¬ 
ments as low in support and closeness and high in conflict (Klonsky, Oltmanns, 
Turkheimer, & Fiedler, 2000). These findings are consistent with Amanda’s 
childhood family experiences. Although it is possible that the symptoms of their 
disorder affect their perception or recall of their childhood families, the physi¬ 
cal and sexual abuse they reported were independently validated in one study 
(Johnson, Cohen, Brown, Smailes, & Bernstein, 1999). Patients with BPD have 
often experienced separation from parents or lack of parental support during 
childhood (Sansone & Levitt, 2005). 

The key causal factor may be an invalidating environment, in which a per¬ 
son’s needs and feelings are disrespected, and efforts to communicate feelings are 
ignored or punished (Linehan, 1993). Among children who are sexually abused, 
it is their perceptions of being invalidated during childhood, including not being 
believed or being blamed when disclosing the abuse, that predicted BPD rather 
than the experience of abuse itself (Hong, Ilardi, & Lishner, 2011). Perceptions of 
being emotionally invalidated in childhood explain part of the link between BPD 
and conflict and instability in adult romantic relationships, perhaps because the 
person feels unlovable, and perhaps because they have not learned how to negoti¬ 
ate relationship difficulties (Selby, Braithewaite, & Fincham, 2008). 

A number of studies have explored the neurobiology of BPD, espe¬ 
cially focusing on emotional instability and impulsivity (Bohus et al., 2004). 
Abnormalities in serotonin activity have been found in prefrontal and limbic 
areas of the brain that may be related to these symptom constellations. The 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis being sensitized by childhood trauma, par¬ 
ticularly in the form of abuse, may also be important in the neurobiology of this 
disorder. Neuroimaging studies have found underactivity in the areas of the brain 
that regulate emotions, overactivity in the limbic areas that involve fear and 
anger, and abnormalities in areas that relate to negative affect (Lis, Greenfield, 
Henry, Guile, & Dougherty, 2007). Although these findings are interesting, they 
do not necessarily establish that these differences are causally related because 
they may be a reflection of the symptoms of the disorder. 

BPD runs in families, suggesting it may have a genetic component, but stud¬ 
ies investigating this have had methodological limitations (White, Gunderson, 
Zanarini, & Hudson, 2003). One of the characteristics that may be inherited is 
neuroticism, a tendency to easily become anxious. Borderline patients are high 
in neuroticism; this trait is a key feature of BPD and is known to be heritable 
(Morey & Zanarini, 2000). Problems regulating emotions may be another key 
component that could be genetically transmitted (White et ah, 2003). 

An integrative model has recently been proposed that explains how risk fac¬ 
tors work together (Crowell, Beauchaine, & Linehan, 2009). To develop BPD, a 
child inherits genes that affect the serotonin system, and possibly the dopamine 
system, that lead to impulsivity and emotional instability. Then, the child is 
exposed to abusive or invalidating environments that include insecure attachment 



294 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


to caregivers. These experiences exacerbate the child’s emotional dysregulation 
and leads to extreme behavioral dyscontrol which develops into a personality 
disorder. 


Treatment 

A number of drugs have been tried in the pharmacotherapy of BPD, including 
antidepressants and atypical antipsychotic medications (Zanarini, 2004). Double¬ 
blind, placebo-controlled trials have shown that many of the different drugs 
help in treating problems managing emotions and controlling impulsiveness and 
aggression. However, the quality of the research establishing the effectiveness of 
the medications is often low, and many patients drop out of the trials, so it is dif¬ 
ficult to make firm conclusions about the long-term effectiveness of medications 
in treating symptoms of BPD (Bellino, Paradiso, & Bogetto, 2008). Initial inves¬ 
tigations also suggest that dietary supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids may 
reduce depression and aggression in patients with BPD (Raj, 2004). 

Object Relations Psychotherapy 

Object relations theory, a branch of psychoanalytic theory, deals with the nature 
and development of mental representations of the self and others. It includes the 
representations and the fantasies and emotions attached to these representations 
and explores how these variables mediate interpersonal functioning. The object 
relations of borderlines are often described as malevolent. Analyses of border¬ 
line patients' responses to projective tests indicate that they view other people 
as capricious and destructive for no reason (Nigg, Lohr, Westen, Gold, & Silk, 
1992). This theory has been particularly important in the field of personality dis¬ 
orders. The leading contemporary object relations theorist is Otto Kernberg, who 
has written extensively about the borderline personality. 

Kernberg (1985) operates from the basic assumption that borderline per¬ 
sonalities have weak egos and therefore experience inordinate difficulty tolerat¬ 
ing the regression (probing of childhood conflicts) that occurs in psychoanalytic 
treatment. Kernberg’s modified analytic treatment has the goal of strengthen¬ 
ing the patient’s weak ego. Therapy involves analysis of a principal defense of 
the borderline person, namely, splitting, or dichotomizing into all good or all 
bad and not integrating positive and negative aspects of a person into a whole. 
Splitting is the result of an inability to form complex object representations. That 
is, the person with BPD does not see people as fairly complex and capable of 
both good and bad behavior. This causes extreme difficulty in regulating emo¬ 
tions because the person sees the world in black-and-white terms. Other peo¬ 
ple and even the self are either all good or all bad; there is no middle ground. 
We saw many examples of this in Amanda, as when she idolized her boyfriend 
but could then shift rapidly to hate. This therapeutic approach was evaluated in 
a long-term, randomized study in comparison to dialectical behavior therapy 



Chapter 1 9 Borderline Personality Disorder 295 


(see below) and a supportive therapy control (Clarkin, Levy, Lenzenweger, & 
Kernberg, 2004; Levy et al., 2006). Both approaches were effective. Kernberg’s 
approach was particularly effective in changing internal representations of rela¬ 
tionships with important others. Future research will evaluate whether certain 
kinds of patients will respond better to one of these effective treatments than to 
the other. 


Dialectical Behavior Therapy 

The other primary treatment for BPD combines client-centered empathy with 
behavioral problem solving and was developed by Marsha Linehan (1993). 
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) centers on therapists’ full acceptance of 
people with borderline personalities with all their contradictions and acting out, 
empathically validating their (distorted) beliefs with a matter-of-fact attitude 
toward their suicidal and other dysfunctional behavior. This total acceptance is 
necessary, argues Linehan, because the patient is extremely sensitive to criticism 
and rejection and will pull away from therapy if any hint of a possible rejection 
is perceived. This acceptance of the current state is a dialectical (or polar oppo¬ 
site) of the goal of bringing about change in the patient. Over time, the goal is to 
synthesize these opposites and move the patient toward change while maintain¬ 
ing empathic validation of them. 

The behavioral aspect of the treatment involves helping patients learn to 
solve problems, that is, to acquire more effective and socially acceptable ways 
of handling their daily living problems and controlling their emotions. Work is 
also done on improving their interpersonal skills and in controlling their anxie¬ 
ties. After many months of intensive treatment, limits are set on their behavior. 
Patients must commit to 1 year of intensive treatment as part of DBT (Smith & 
Peck, 2004). 

A meta-analysis of all treatment outcome studies evaluating DBT indi¬ 
cates that it is a moderately effective treatment for BPD and results in reduc¬ 
tions in symptoms, including suicide attempts and self-injurious behaviors 
(Kliem, Kroger, & Kosfelder, 2010). There has been an increasing amount of 
interest in and evidence supporting this treatment approach (Feigenbaum, 2007). 
Workshops and seminars have been offered around the country, and the therapy 
is becoming rather widely used. It has also been used in inpatient settings—a 
3-month inpatient treatment program using DBT was effective in reducing 
depression, anxiety, and self-injury and in improving interpersonal functioning 
(Bohus et al., 2004). 

Amanda’s therapists faced a common dilemma encountered with borderline 
patients: Should treatment be aimed at structural intrapsychic change or simply 
better adaptation to the environment? Waldinger and Gunderson (1984) found in 
a retrospective study that relatively few borderline patients complete the process 
of intensive psychotherapy, often terminating when an impasse in therapy 
occurs. When Amanda decided to change therapists, a decision had to be made 



296 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


as to whether or not she was seeking change to avoid working through a difficult 
impasse in therapy. It was determined that this may have been the case, but that 
she was unlikely to remain in therapy if her request was not granted. 

Although Amanda’s treatment seemed largely unsuccessful, all people with 
BPD are not equally impaired. Many do have significant disability, but there is a 
decline in the prevalence of BPD among those older than 44 years (Grant et al., 
2008). Not all borderline patients are as self-destructive as Amanda, but they are 
often challenging to treat. 


Discussion Questions 


1. What is the main causal factor of BPD? Research has also found evidence for 
genetic factors; how can they both be related? 

2. How did Amanda cause difficulty for the patients and staff in the psychiatric 
hospital? How could the staff handle this better? 

3. Why do therapists find it difficult to treat this disorder? What are the specific 
symptoms and behaviors that can be challenging? 

4 . Which treatment would you use if you were the therapist of a patient with 
BPD: Kernberg’s object relations therapy or Linehan’s DBT? Why? 




CHAPTER 20 


Antisocial Personality Disorder: 
Psychopathy 


This case differs from most of the others in this book because Bill was never in 
therapy. One of the authors was acquainted with Bill during his childhood and 
adolescence. The following case history is based on this personal experience. 

Bill was the third child in the Wallace family. His parents, originally from 
Europe, had immigrated when Bill was 9 years old. They rented an apartment on 
the upper floor of a house in a middle-class neighborhood, and Bill’s father got 
a job in a local factory. His mother worked part time in a supermarket. No infor¬ 
mation is available concerning the family’s history when they lived in Europe. 

Bill and his older brother. Jack, quickly became part of the neighborhood 
group and participated in all the activities, including baseball, football, and out¬ 
ings to the beach. Jack became a leader in the group, and Bill, although not as 
well liked as his brother, was always included. 

I began to get to know Bill well. We were the same age; most of the other 
boys were older. Although we became friends, our relationship was also char¬ 
acterized by a good deal of conflict. When things did not go Bill’s way, his 
response was simple and direct—a fight. My first fight with Bill was during a 
baseball game at a park. We were on opposing teams and were involved in 
a close play at second base. He slid into the base; I tagged and called “out,” and 
Bill jumped up swinging his fists. Although he lost these fights as often as he 
won them, fighting became a consistent pattern in his relationships, both with 
me and with other neighborhood children. Not even an older and obviously 
stronger opponent could get Bill to back down. 

Bill’s aggressiveness was not really what made him seem different as we 
grew up together. His escalating daredevil and antisocial behavior seemed more 
peculiar. One of the first of these episodes occurred when Bill organized a 
window-breaking competition. He explained to me and three other boys that 
he had recently been walking neighborhood streets at night, throwing rocks 
through windows. With great enthusiasm, he described the excitement this 


297 



298 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


created and how he had easily eluded the few residents who had come out to 
try to catch him. Bill wanted the four of us to compete in a window-breaking 
contest. He had worked out a detailed point system—the larger the window, the 
more points—and wanted to start that night. We all agreed to meet at 7:30 p.m. 
in front of his house. 

We met as planned and first filled our pockets with stones. The competition 
soon began, with Bill clearly in the role of leader, encouraging the rest of us 
and pointing out windows that would yield many points. My own reaction as all 
this began was extreme fear. All I could think of was, “What if we get caught?” 
Bill, in contrast, showed no signs of apprehension. Indeed, he seemed ecstatic 
and was virtually bubbling over with enthusiasm. His only negative reaction of 
the evening was directed toward me when, after “missing” several windows, 
I emptied my pockets and withdrew from the competition. “You gutless 
chicken,” he called as I went down the street toward home. The other two boys 
went along with Bill. They also seemed frightened, but they looked up to Bill 
and may have been more concerned by his disapproval. Although I was excluded 
from subsequent nights of competition. Bill eagerly kept me informed of the 
results. After several months, he was declared the winner when he broke all the 
large windows of the supermarket where his mother worked. 

At age 10, petty theft replaced window breaking as Bill’s major source of 
excitement. It seemed to me that he always stole something whenever I was in 
a store with him. He would steal anything—candy, fruit, clothing, toys—not 
just things he wanted. In fact, he often threw away the things he had stolen. He 
seemed more interested in the excitement than in any actual material gain. 
He had discovered several ways of getting money. The first was a Roman 
Catholic church that had two easy sources of cash—a poor box and a container 
for donations left by worshippers who had lit a candle. Bill cleaned out both 
on a regular basis. His second source was a restaurant that had a wishing well 
located in a rear garden, whose proceeds went to the Salvation Army. Although 
the wishing well was covered with a metal grate, Bill found an opening just large 
enough to get his hand through. Every couple of weeks, armed with a flashlight 
and a long stick, he would sneak into the garden at night, move the coins to the 
right spot, and collect them. Because he often had money, he had to lie regularly 
to his parents about how he got it, inventing a series of odd jobs he held around 
the neighborhood. Finally, he regularly stole milk money from various neigh¬ 
borhood homes. Bill even stole the milk money from my home. The first time 
our money was missing, I went directly after him and accused him of the theft. 
He denied it. The second time, he admitted the theft and offered to cut me in if 
I would keep quiet! 

One other incident, which occurred when Bill and I were both 12, crystal¬ 
lized for me how Bill was somehow different. About a 15-minute walk from 
our homes was a river that had many expensive houses along its banks. A tre¬ 
mendous rainstorm caused a flood, and tragically, more than 100 people were 
killed. Early the next morning, with the news of the disaster in the papers and 



Chapter 20 Antisocial Personality Disorder: Psychopathy 299 


on the radio, Bill set out for the scene. Because the victims were wealthy. Bill 
reasoned, he might strike it rich if he could be the first one to find some bodies 
and take their wallets, watches, and jewelry. He went alone and returned later in 
the day, proudly displaying his loot—six watches and several hundred dollars. 
He had found several dead bodies and stolen their possessions. He returned to 
the river several more times over the next few days, and although he came back 
empty-handed, he would enthusiastically relate his experiences to anyone who 
would listen. The excitement and danger seemed more important than the valu¬ 
ables he found. 

During these 3 years, most of the neighborhood youngsters had also 
received more than a glimpse of the Wallaces’ family life. Bill’s father was fre¬ 
quently out of work and seemed to have trouble holding a job for more than sev¬ 
eral months at a stretch. He drank heavily. While we played street ball, we often 
saw him returning home, obviously drunk. At the first glimpse of their drunken 
father, Bill and Jack would get out of his sight as quickly as possible. Both boys 
reported frequent beatings, particularly when their father had been drinking. At 
the same time, Bill’s father allowed him to get away with things, such as staying 
out late at night, which none of the other neighborhood children were allowed to 
do. Bill and Jack both described their father as unpredictable in his punishments. 
Their father and mother also fought often, and his mother may well have been 
physically abused. On many occasions, our play was interrupted by yelling and 
the sound of loud crashes from their apartment. 

The Wallaces eventually moved to an apartment in another area of the city, 
about a 30-minute bus ride from their first home. Bill and I were no longer 
close friends, but I kept track of him through Jack, his older brother. According 
to Jack, Bill’s pattern of antisocial behavior escalated. He continued to steal 
regularly, even from members of his family. He frequently skipped school and 
got into very serious trouble for hitting a teacher who had tried to break up a 
fight between him and another boy. Jack was very concerned about Bill and 
attempted to talk to him several times. Jack reported that during these talks, Bill 
would genuinely seem to agree that he had to change and would express shame 
and regret about whatever he had done most recently. However, within a few 
days the old pattern would be back in full force. Jack eventually came to see 
Bill’s contrition as a con. 

We were both 15 the next time I met Bill. Through my continued contacts 
with Jack, I had learned that Bill had been sent to reform school. I did not know 
any of the details because Jack had been so ashamed of his brother’s behavior 
that he would not talk about it. One evening shortly after dinner, the doorbell 
rang. I answered, and Bill motioned me outside. He had escaped from reform 
school and wanted me to buy him a meal and loan him some money. We went to 
a local restaurant where I bought a hamburger for him and Cokes for both of us. 
He told me he had been convicted of car theft and rape the previous year. He had 
been stealing cars regularly and taking them on joyrides. He was caught when 
he decided to keep a stolen car, one that had particularly caught his fancy. The 



300 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


third day he had the car, he had parked in a deserted place with a 12-year-old girl 
he knew from school, where he raped her. As Bill related the story, he became 
visibly disgusted, not at himself, but at the girl. As he explained it, he was only 
trying to have some fun and had picked this particular girl because she was 
only 12 years old and not likely to get pregnant. From his perspective, it was an 
ideal situation. With pregnancy impossible, she should have just lain back and 
enjoyed it. He obviously had no concern at all for the feelings of his victim. 

I never saw Bill again but through Jack learned what happened to him over 
the next several years. A few weeks after our meeting, he was apprehended 
by the police. He had again stolen a car; while driving drunk, he had smashed 
into a telephone pole. After a short stay in a hospital, he was returned to the 
reform school, where he spent 2 years. When he was released. Bill had changed 
greatly. It seemed to Jack that he had now become a real criminal. Car thefts 
were no longer for joyrides but for profit. Bill became involved in selling stolen 
cars to others who stripped them to sell their parts. He briefly returned to high 
school but with no friends there and little real interest, he soon dropped out. He 
became a regular at the racetrack and lost money there and with several book¬ 
makers. As had happened before, Jack tried to talk to his younger brother about 
the trouble for which he seemed headed. But now even the charade of shame and 
guilt was gone. Bill expressed an “I’ll take what I want when I want it” attitude. 
When Jack tried to point out the likely negative consequences of his behavior. 
Bill simply shrugged it off, saying that he was too smart to ever end up in jail. 

Shortly after his 18th birthday, Bill attempted a bank robbery, armed with 
a .38-caliber automatic pistol. Bill was driving a stolen car. On seeing what he 
thought was a bank, he impulsively decided to rob it. In his rush, he had actu¬ 
ally undertaken to rob an office of the electric company. Seeing the people 
lined up at tellers’ windows to pay their bills had made him think it was a bank. 
Once inside, although recognizing his mistake, he decided to go through with 
the holdup anyway and had several tellers empty their cash drawers into a sack. 
A patrol car passed by the office as the holdup was in progress, and seeing what 
was happening, the policemen stopped to investigate. Bill ran out of the office 
directly into the police and was easily arrested. He was tried, convicted, and sen¬ 
tenced to 10 years in the penitentiary. 


Discussion 


The terms antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) and psychopathy (and some¬ 
times sociopathy as well) are often used interchangeably, although there are 
important differences between the two. Antisocial personality disorder is a diag¬ 
nostic category that is more centered on the person’s behaviors, and psychopathy 
is a constellation of personality traits as well as behaviors. These traits include 
callousness, manipulativeness, arrogance, superficiality, and short-tempered¬ 
ness; psychopaths do not form strong emotional connections to others, and they 




Chapter 20 Antisocial Personality Disorder: Psychopathy 301 


lack empathy, guilt, and remorse (Hare, 2006). Although ASPD is a category, 
psychopathy probably lies along a dimension (Edens, Marcus, Lilienfeld, & 
Poythress, 2006). The current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR\ APA, 2000) concept of ASPD involves two major com¬ 
ponents. The first refers to antisocial behavior before the age of 15. Criteria 
include truancy, running away from home, frequent lying, theft, arson, and delib¬ 
erate destruction of property. The second refers to the continuation of this pat¬ 
tern of antisocial behavior in adulthood. Adults with ASPD show irresponsible 
and antisocial behavior by not working consistently, breaking laws, being irrita¬ 
ble and physically aggressive, defaulting on debts, and being reckless. They are 
impulsive and fail to plan ahead. In addition, they show no regard for truth or 
remorse for their harmful actions. 

The concept of psychopathy is closely linked to the writings of Hervey 
Cleckley in his classic book. The Mask of Sanity (1976). On the basis of his vast 
clinical experience, Cleckley identified a constellation of personality traits that 
typify the psychopath. One of the key characteristics of psychopathy is poverty 
of emotions, both positive and negative. People high on psychopathy have no 
sense of shame, and even their seemingly positive feelings for others are merely 
an act. They are superficially charming and manipulate others for personal gain. 
The lack of some negative emotions, especially anxiety, may make it impossible 
for psychopaths to learn from their mistakes, and the lack of positive emotions 
leads them to behave irresponsibly toward others. Cleckley describes the anti¬ 
social behavior of the psychopath as “inadequately motivated”; it is not due, for 
example, to a need for something like money but is performed impulsively, as 
much for thrills as anything else. 

Currently, most researchers identify psychopathy using a checklist devel¬ 
oped by Hare et al. (1990). The checklist identifies two major clusters of psy¬ 
chopathic behaviors. The first, referred to as emotional detachment, describes 
a selfish, remorseless individual who exploits others (descriptors of this cluster 
include lack of remorse or guilt, callous lack of empathy, and manipulativeness). 
The second characterizes an antisocial lifestyle (parasitic behavior, pathological 
lying, history of juvenile delinquency). One important characteristic of people 
with high levels of psychopathy is their use of instrumental aggression, which 
is planned, purposeful, and goal directed, as well as the more common reactive 
aggression, which is characterized by anger and is in response to threat or frus¬ 
tration (Blair, Peschardt, Budhani, Mitchell, & Pine, 2006). Psychopathy is asso¬ 
ciated with both types of aggression, whereas other disorders are associated with 
reactive aggression but not instrumental aggression. The degree of psychopathy 
among adolescents who have committed a crime strongly predicts their likeli¬ 
hood to continue involvement in criminal activities into adulthood, particularly 
violent offenses (Gretton, Hare, & Catchpole, 2004). 

There is continuing controversy about the nature of the relationship 
between ASPD and psychopathy, but a large study of male offenders sug¬ 
gested that ASPD is a heterogeneous category, and identifying subtypes might 



302 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


be useful (Poythress et al., 2010). This confusion complicates integrating the 
findings of research in this area because the clinical features are defined in 
different ways. Bill’s behavior during childhood and adolescence clearly 
meets many of Cleckley’s criteria. Bill was unreliable, untruthful, lacking in 
any feelings of shame about his misconduct, and totally without anxiety. His 
antisocial behavior (such as stealing) was not motivated by any genuine desire 
to possess the stolen objects but rather to get some sort of thrill. And he often 
displayed poor judgment, particularly in his escapades of late adolescence. His 
poverty of emotion was amply demonstrated by his thefts from the homes of 
his friends and by the attitude he had toward the victim of his rape, which was 
completely lacking in empathy. 

In a large, nationally representative study, 3.63% of adult Americans met 
the criteria for ASPD (Grant et al., 2004). Three times as many men as women 
have the disorder. It is more common among Native Americans, less common 
among Asian Americans, and less common among older rather than younger 
age groups. Psychopathy is found in about 1% of Americans, but about 25% 
of prison inmates (Hare, 2006). There is no significant difference between 
African Americans and European Americans (whites) on the level of psycho¬ 
pathy (Skeem, Edens, Camp, & Colwell, 2004). Pimps, con artists, murderers, 
and drug dealers are by no means the only antisocial personalities. Business 
executives, professors, politicians, physicians, plumbers, salespeople, carpen¬ 
ters, and bartenders can have antisocial personality traits as well. Psychopathy 
may be more common in business settings than in the general population, and 
the ability to manipulate others and lie about coworkers may lead to success in 
a competitive corporate environment as well as in “white-collar” crimes (Gao & 
Raine, 2010). Adult antisocial personalities have a history of behavior problems 
and conduct disorder in childhood (Paris, 2004). Their symptoms tend to fade 
some during middle age, and a number of people with antisocial personalities 
die prematurely. 

Etiological Considerations 

Much research has been done on the causes of ASPD, especially in light of its 
costs to our society. Research evidence from many different areas of focus has 
shown promise. One area of research has focused on identifying abnormalities 
in the brain that might explain the disorder. Researchers in one study examined 
brain reactions to certain kinds of auditory stimuli and found significant differ¬ 
ences between incarcerated men classified as psychopathic compared to those 
classified as nonpsychopathic; these differences were suggestive of problems 
in the paralimbic system, such as temporal lobe dysfunction (Kiehl, Bates, 
Laurens, Hare, & Liddle, 2006). Neurobiological investigations have also sug¬ 
gested abnormalities in the functioning of the amygdala (a part of the brain 
involved in aversive conditioning and responses to facial expressions depict¬ 
ing fear and sadness) among people with high psychopathy (Blair, 2003). Some 



Chapter 20 Antisocial Personality Disorder: Psychopathy 303 


studies have shown that they have smaller amygdalas, and others have shown 
reduced amygdala response. The reasons for these brain differences, however, 
are unknown. 

Several psychological and cognitive factors provide important clues to the 
etiology of ASPD. Some key features of psychopathy are impulsivity and dif¬ 
ficulty learning from punishment. In one study demonstrating this phenomenon, 
participants viewed playing cards on a computer screen (Newman, Patterson, & 
Kosson, 1987). If a face card appeared, the participant won 5 cents; if a card 
other than a face card appeared, he lost 5 cents. After each trial, the participant 
could either continue or quit the game. The probability of losing was control¬ 
led by the experimenter and started at 10%, but increased by 10% every 10 
cards until it reached 100%. The psychopaths continued to play the game much 
longer than the control participants. Of the psychopaths, 9 out of 12 contin¬ 
ued to play the game even after they had lost money on 19 of the last 20 tri¬ 
als. They appeared unable to alter a maladaptive response. When the same game 
was played with a 5-second waiting period imposed after each trial, the psycho¬ 
paths markedly reduced the number of trials for which they played the game. 
Enforcing a delay may force psychopaths to reflect on their behavior and thus be 
less impulsive. Psychopaths did not pause after either punishment or reward and 
seemed not to reflect on feedback; in general, they played more quickly (Molto, 
Poy, Segarra, Pastor, & Montanes, 2007). 

These findings seem particularly applicable to Bill. The fear that might 
prevent stealing, breaking windows, and looting seemed totally absent in him. 
From his own statements, we can conclude that he felt little shame or remorse 
about his transgressions. Indeed, he seemed proud of them. He clearly had little 
or no empathy for his victims. Finally, Bill also displayed characteristics similar 
to those revealed in the study by Newman, Patterson, and Kosson (1987), not 
reflecting on the negative consequences of his antisocial behavior. 

Because of the role of the autonomic nervous system in emotion, investigators 
have examined psychopaths for both their resting levels of autonomic activity and 
their patterns of autonomic reactivity to various classes of stimuli. Psychopaths 
have lower than normal levels of skin conductance, are less autonomically reac¬ 
tive when stressful or aversive stimuli are presented, and have lower resting heart 
rates (Lorber, 2004). These results are consistent with clinical descriptions of psy¬ 
chopaths as being nonanxious and with research using other measures of emotion, 
showing that people high on psychopathy are generally less emotionally reactive 
(Herpetz, Werth, & Lukas, 2001; Patrick, Bradley, & Lang, 1993). While some 
psychopaths have a fearless temperament, others are impulsive and have difficulty 
controlling their negative emotions (Dindo & Fowles, 2011). 

Overall, the research literature is consistent with the idea that it is difficult 
to arouse negative emotions in psychopaths. This may well be an important 
determinant of their repetitive antisocial behavior. But arousing negative emo¬ 
tions is not the only component of socialization; empathy—being aware of 
and in tune with the emotions of others—could be equally important. The idea 



304 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


that people with high levels of psychopathy lack empathy has been tested by 
examining their skin conductance responses while viewing slides of varying 
content. Consistent with the idea that psychopathy involves a lack of empathy, 
they showed smaller responses to slides showing people in distress (Blair, Jones, 
Clark, & Smith, 1997). 

Other researchers have explored genetic factors. Both criminality and antiso¬ 
cial personality have heritable components (Hicks, Krueger, Iacono, McGue, & 
Patrick, 2004). Studies of twins reared apart show that genes play a role in the 
likelihood that a person will commit a criminal act (Gottesman & Goldsmith, 
1994). For ASPD, twin studies show higher concordance for monozygotic (MZ) 
than dizygotic (DZ) pairs (Lyons et al., 1995), and adoption studies show higher 
rates of antisocial behavior in the adopted children of biological parents with 
ASPD (Cadoret, Yates, Troughton, Woodworth, & Stewart, 1995). A large, longi¬ 
tudinal twin study identified several different types of etiological genetic factors, 
including one that is associated with life-course persistent antisocial behavior 
(lasting from childhood through adulthood) and one that is associated with only 
adult antisocial behavior. Adolescent antisocial behavior appears to be more 
related to environmental factors (Silberg, Rutter, Tracy, Maes, & Eaves, 2007). 
The personality traits of callousness and lack of emotion are also strongly herit¬ 
able (Gunter, Vaughn, & Philibert, 2010). 

Although genetic factors are clearly involved, they may interact with envi¬ 
ronmental factors. A notable example of this interaction is the monoamine oxi¬ 
dase A (MAOA) gene. The level of MAOA enzyme, regulated by this gene, 
affects the actions of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine in ways related 
to the risk for antisocial behavior. When there is a low level of the MAOA 
enzyme, there is increased antisocial behavior when the adolescent is raised in 
an environment characterized by parental neglect, exposure to violence between 
parents, and inconsistent parental discipline (Foley et al., 2004). Physical abuse 
elevates the risk of dysfunction for both groups but especially strongly for those 
with the gene for low levels of this enzyme (Kim-Cohen et al., 2006). Child mal¬ 
treatment led to ASPD when combined with this form of the MAOA enzyme 
even in an adopted sample (Beach et al., 2010). Genes may only be expressed in 
certain types of environments, and interactions between genes and environments 
are an important new line of research. 

Researchers have also found a link between prenatal exposure to cigarette 
smoking of the mother and later antisocial behavior. Research has shown this 
link to be stronger the more cigarettes that were used, even when genetic risks 
for antisocial behavior were controlled (Maughan, Taylor, Caspi, & Moffitt, 
2004). However, investigators cautioned that the effects could be due to some 
other difference in the environment that has not been controlled. More research 
is needed to find out whether cigarette smoking during pregnancy increases the 
child’s later antisocial behavior. 

Environmental factors are also implicated in the origins of ASPD. Children 
who grow up in physically abusive or neglectful homes are at increased risk 



Chapter 20 Antisocial Personality Disorder: Psychopathy 305 


for antisocial behavior in adolescence and adulthood (Cicchetti & Toth, 2004). 
Authoritarian parenting characterized by a combination of punitiveness and 
restrictiveness with low warmth has been linked to antisocial behavior in chil¬ 
dren (Smith & Farrington, 2004). In addition, conflict and violence between 
parents increases a child’s antisociality. The harsh yet inconsistent disciplinary 
practices of Bill’s father, as well as the conflict between his parents, mesh well 
with these findings. The link between parents with antisocial traits and chil¬ 
dren with antisocial traits may be partly due to harsh, inconsistent, or reject¬ 
ing parenting behaviors (Barnow, Lucht, & Freyberger, 2005). In addition to 
this link through disrupted parenting, mothers’ antisocial behavior is linked 
to adolescents’ antisocial behavior through the teens’ awareness of their moth¬ 
ers engaging in this behavior by drinking too much, breaking the law, having a 
lot of conflicts with others, lying, and engaging in reckless actions; thereby, the 
mothers serve as a model to imitate (Dogan, Conger, Kim, & Masyn, 2007). If 
a mother is depressed during her pregnancy, her child has twice the risk of anti¬ 
social behavior and four times the risk of violent behavior during adolescence, 
even when taking into account her depression at other times in the child’s life 
and the family’s exposure to adversity (Hay, Pawlby, Waters, Perra, & Sharp, 
2010). The depression may affect the developing fetus or may alter the quality of 
the relationship between the mother and the expected child. 

Although parents indeed influence their children, children also influence 
their parents, so considering parenting styles without also examining tempera¬ 
mental or neurological differences in children might miss important information. 
For example, Moffitt (1993) proposed that persistent antisocial behavior begins 
with deficits in neurological functions, such as attention and impulsivity. These 
deficits make the child difficult for the parents to handle and can produce the 
type of disciplinary practices that were found by the early studies on parenting 
and psychopathic behavior. Social factors are important as well; school failure, 
peer rejection, and identification with a deviant peer group are important pre¬ 
dictors of adult antisocial behavior (Granic & Patterson, 2006). Growing up in 
poverty is also a risk factor for the development of antisocial traits in children. 
Macmillan, McMorris, and Kruttschnitt (2004) found that when families living 
in poverty were able to escape the poverty, their children’s antisocial behavior 
was reduced. Long-term exposure to poverty was most harmful. 

Recently, psychologists have been reexamining various types of mental 
disorders from an evolutionary perspective. Antisocial personality traits can 
be conceptualized as a successful strategy for survival that originated in genes 
that would have been selected for by the social environment, and thus contin¬ 
ued in the human genome. There are two different ways this could be seen as 
an advantage, either at the individual level or at the societal level. At the indi¬ 
vidual level, antisociality could be a developmental strategy for harsh, dif¬ 
ficult environments, which would trigger the genes controlling it so the child 
growing up in this harsh environment would develop a cheating or free-riding 
strategy (Smith, 2006). Such a strategy would be more successful in a harsh 



306 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


environment, at least sometimes, than a cooperative, relational strategy. This 
model is consistent with the evidence that there is a gene-environment interac¬ 
tion for antisociality that is triggered by child physical abuse. At the societal 
level, humans typically resided in small social groups and would have had one 
member with high antisociality, estimating from the current rates of the dis¬ 
order in contemporary populations. This member would have given the social 
group experience with deception and manipulativeness and given them a chance 
to develop the ability to detect and cope with this strategy so that when they 
faced similar challenges from others outside the group, they would not have 
been as vulnerable (Miric, Hallet-Mathieu, & Amar, 2005). However, to limit 
the effectiveness of the manipulativeness of the person with antisociality, the 
trait was countered by impulsiveness to reduce its destructiveness; the social 
groups carrying genes of just manipulativeness would have died out. These 
hypotheses provide interesting explanations for why the genes for this disorder 
were not eliminated through natural selection. 

Treatment 

There is general agreement that treatment is often unsuccessful for psychopaths. 
Cleckley (1976, pp. 438-439) summarized his clinical impressions as follows: 

Over a period of many years I have remained discouraged about the 
effect of treatment on the psychopath. Having regularly failed in my 
own efforts to help such patients, ...I hoped for a while that treatment 
by others would be more successful. I have had the opportunity to see 
patients of this sort who were treated by psychoanalysis, by psychoana- 
lytically oriented psychotherapy, by group and milieu therapy.... None 
of these measures impressed me as achieving successful results.... 

I have now, after more than three decades, had the opportunity to 
observe a considerable number of patients who, through commitment or 
the threat of losing their probation status or by other means, were kept 
under treatment...for years. The therapeutic failure in all such patients 
leads me to feel that we do not at present have any kind of psychother¬ 
apy that can be relied on to change the psychopath fundamentally. 

There is not much empirical evidence for the effectiveness of treatments 
for psychopaths (Lynam, Caspi, Moffitt, Loeber, & Stouthamer-Loeber, 2007). 
Psychopharmacology is not effective (Rodrigo, Rajapakse, & Jayananda, 
2010). Some forms of therapy may even have negative effects. Rice, Harris, and 
Cormier (1992) compared the results of a therapeutic community to standard 
institutionalization in a sample of prison inmates. Although the special program 
reduced recidivism in nonpsychopaths, it actually increased it among psycho¬ 
paths. The inability of psychopaths to form an honest, trusting relationship 



Chapter 20 Antisocial Personality Disorder: Psychopathy 307 


with a therapist may be a major reason for the ineffectiveness of psychotherapy. 
A person who lies, cares little for the feelings of others, and has few regrets 
about personal misconduct is certainly a poor candidate for most forms of psy¬ 
chotherapy. One experienced clinician (Lion, 1978) has suggested the following 
guidelines: 

First, the therapist must be continually vigilant with regard to manipu¬ 
lation on the part of the patient. Second, he must assume, until proved 
otherwise, that information given to him by the patient contains distor¬ 
tions and fabrications. Third, he must recognize that a working alliance 
develops, if ever, exceedingly late in any therapeutic relationship. 

Preventing some cases of ASPD may be possible through programs 
designed to address situations that put individuals at risk for developing the dis¬ 
order. For example, programs to reduce child abuse might prevent later antiso¬ 
cial behavior among the children at risk for abuse (Flarrington & Bailey, 2004). 
Also, targeting groups of children and adolescents known to be at high risk for 
antisocial behavior, such as those with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 
might be effective. Behavioral parent-training, which teaches parents behavio¬ 
ral techniques to reinforce their children’s adaptive behavior and decrease their 
antisocial behavior, is moderately effective in reducing antisocial behavior in 
children, and cognitive-behavioral therapy, which teaches problem solving and 
corrects perceptual distortions, is moderately effective in reducing antisocial 
behavior in adolescents (McCart, Priester, Davies, & Azen, 2006). Although 
the evidence for effective treatments for adults is scant, there is more to show 
that treating antisociality among adolescents and children does work (Salekin, 
Worley, & Grimes, 2010). Multisystemic treatment, a treatment approach for 
juvenile offenders that focuses on family and home interventions, shows promise 
(Curtis, Ronan, & Borduin, 2004). The treatment focuses on making changes in 
the family, school, and community settings to reduce their contributions to prob¬ 
lem behaviors. A recent meta-analysis found that adolescents who received the 
treatment had better functioning than 70% of those who did not receive the treat¬ 
ment. This raises the hope that specific types of early intervention may reduce 
the severity and cost of future adult ASPD. 

Discussion Questions 

1. Flow could Bill’s ASPD have emerged from the combination of genes and 
environmental experiences? What specific environmental factors were impor¬ 
tant in Bill’s life? In what we know about the case, was there any evidence for 
his father having antisocial traits? 

2. Which symptoms of ASPD did Bill have? 




308 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 

3. Research suggests that the most effective treatment for ASPD is to prevent 
cases in the first place by focusing on children and adolescents at risk for the 
disorder. What are the obstacles to doing this? 

4 . The difficulty in treating people with ASPD poses great challenges for our 
society, given their higher rates of violence and criminal behavior. Some have 
advocated keeping such people incarcerated until they are older in an attempt 
to prevent their future crimes. What do you think about this? What are the 
pros and cons of such an approach? 



CHAPTER 21 


Autistic Disorder 


Sam Williams was the second child of John and Carol Williams. The couple had 
been married for 5 years when Sam was born; John was a lawyer and Carol a 
homemaker. Sam weighed 7 pounds, 11 ounces at birth, which had followed an 
uncomplicated, full-term pregnancy. Delivered by caesarean section, he came 
home after 6 days in the hospital. 

His parents reported that Sam’s early development seemed quite normal. He 
was not colicky, and he slept and ate well. During his first 2 years, there were no 
childhood illnesses except some mild colds. By Sam’s second birthday, however, 
his parents began to have concerns. He had been somewhat slower than his older 
sister in achieving some developmental milestones (such as sitting up alone and 
crawling). Furthermore, his motor development seemed uneven. He would crawl 
normally for a few days and then not crawl at all for a while. Although he made 
babbling sounds, he had not developed any speech and did not even seem to 
understand anything his parents said to him. Simple requests, such as “Come” or 
“Do you want a cookie?” elicited no response. 

Initially, his parents thought that Sam might be deaf. Later they vacillated 
between this belief and the idea that Sam was being stubborn. They reported 
many frustrating experiences in which they tried to force him to obey a com¬ 
mand or say “Mama” or “Dada.” Sometimes Sam would go into a tantrum dur¬ 
ing one of these situations, yelling, screaming, and throwing himself to the 
floor. That same year, their pediatrician told them that Sam might be mentally 
retarded. 

As he neared his third birthday, Sam’s parents noticed him engaging in 
more and more strange and puzzling behavior. Most obvious were his repeti¬ 
tive hand movements. Many times each day, he would suddenly flap his hands 
rapidly for several minutes (activities like this are called self-stimulatory behav¬ 
iors). Other times he rolled his eyes around in their sockets. He still did not 
speak, but he made smacking sounds, and sometimes he would burst out laugh¬ 
ing for no apparent reason. He was walking now and often walked on his toes. 
Sam had not been toilet trained, although his parents had tried. 


309 



310 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Sam’s social development was also worrying his parents. Although he 
would let them hug and touch him, he would not look at them and generally 
seemed indifferent to their attention. He also did not play at all with his older 
sister, seeming to prefer being left alone. Even his solitary play was strange. He 
did not engage in make-believe play with his toys—for example, pretending to 
drive a toy car into a gas station. Instead, he was more likely just to manipulate a 
toy, such as a car, holding it and repetitively spinning its wheels. The only thing 
that really seemed to interest him was a ceiling fan in the den. He was content to 
sit there for as long as permitted, watching intently as the fan spun around and 
around. He would often have temper tantrums when the fan was turned off. 

At the age of 3, the family’s pediatrician recommended a complete physical 
and neurological examination. Sam was found to be in good physical health, and 
the neurological examination revealed nothing remarkable. A psychiatric evalua¬ 
tion was performed several months later. Sam was brought to a treatment facility 
specializing in behavior disturbances of childhood and was observed for a day. 
During that time, the psychiatrist was able to see firsthand most of the behaviors 
that Sam’s parents had described—hand flapping, toe walking, smacking sounds, 
and preference for being left alone. When the psychiatrist evaluated Sam, she 
observed that a loud slapping noise did not elicit a startle response as it does in 
most children. The only vocalization she could elicit that approximated speech 
was a repetitive “nah, nah.” Sam did, however, obey some simple commands 
such as “Come” and “Go get a potato chip.” She diagnosed Sam as having autis¬ 
tic disorder and recommended placement in a day-treatment setting. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


Sam was 4 years old by the time there was an opening for him at the treatment 
center. He attended the special school 5 days a week, spending the remainder of 
his time at home with his parents and sister. The school provided a comprehen¬ 
sive educational program conducted by specially trained teachers. The program 
was organized mainly along operant conditioning principles. In addition, Sam’s 
parents attended classes once a week to learn operant conditioning so they could 
continue the school program at home. The school’s personnel conducted another 
evaluation of Sam, observing him in the school and later at home. Interviews 
with the parents established that they were both well adjusted and that their mar¬ 
riage was stable. Both parents were, however, experiencing considerable stress 
from having to cope with Sam on a day-to-day basis and from their fears that his 
condition might have been caused by something they had done. 

One of the first targets of the training program was Sam's eye contact. When 
working with Sam, his teacher provided small food rewards when Sam sponta¬ 
neously looked at him. The teacher also began requesting eye contact and again 
rewarded Sam when he complied. Along with this training, the teacher worked 
on having Sam obey other simple commands. The teacher would wait for a time 




Chapter 21 Autistic Disorder 311 


when Sam seemed attentive and would then, establishing eye contact, say the 
command and model the desired behavior by demonstrating it. For example, 
the teacher would say, “Sam, stretch your arms up like this,” lifting Sam’s arms 
up and rewarding him with praise and a small amount of food, such as a grape. 
This procedure was repeated several times. When Sam began to become more 
skilled at following the command, the teacher stopped raising Sam’s arms for 
him and had him do it himself. These training trials were conducted daily. As 
Sam’s response to a particular command became well established, the teacher 
would expand his learning to following commands in other situations and by 
other people. Sam’s progress was slow. It often took weeks of training to estab¬ 
lish his response to a simple command. After his first year in the school, he 
responded reliably to several simple requests such as “Come,” “Give it to me,” 
and “Put on your coat.” At the same time that Sam was learning to respond to 
commands, other aspects of the training program were also being implemented. 
While Sam was in the classroom, his teacher worked with him on trying to 
develop skills that would be important in learning, for example, sitting in his 
seat, maintaining eye contact, and listening and working for longer periods of 
time. His teacher used the same reward strategy to teach Sam each activity. 

As these skills became better established, the teacher also began working 
on expanding Sam’s vocabulary by teaching him the words for pictures of com¬ 
mon objects. A picture of one object, such as an orange, was placed on a table 
in front of Sam. After Sam had looked at the object, the teacher said, “This is an 
orange. Point to the orange.” When Sam pointed to the orange, he was rewarded. 
If necessary, the teacher would move his hand for him at first. Next another pic¬ 
ture, such as a cat, was selected and the same procedure followed. Then the two 
pictures were placed in front of Sam and the teacher asked him to point to one of 
them: “Point to the orange.” If Sam pointed correctly, he was rewarded. If he did 
not, the teacher moved his hand to the correct object. After Sam had correctly 
pointed to the orange several times in a row, the teacher asked him to point to 
the cat. With that response established, the teacher switched the position of 
the pictures and repeated the process. When Sam had begun to point correctly 
to the orange and the cat, a third picture was introduced and the training proce¬ 
dure was started anew. During 1 year of training, Sam learned the names of 38 
common objects with this procedure. 

Sam’s speech therapist, whom he saw daily, was also working with him on 
language skills. Initially, they worked on getting Sam to imitate simple sounds. 
Sitting across a table from Sam and waiting until Sam was looking (or prompt¬ 
ing him to look by holding a piece of food near his mouth), the teacher would 
say, “Say this, ah,” taking care to accentuate the movements required for this 
sound. At first, Sam was rewarded for making any sound. Subsequently, rewards 
were given when Sam approximated more and more closely the required sound. 
As sounds were mastered, Sam was trained to say simple words in a similar 
fashion. Over the course of a year, Sam learned a few words—’’bye-bye,” “no 
more,” and “mine,” but overall, his verbal imitation remained poor. 



312 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Teaching Sam to dress and undress himself was another target during the 
first year. Initially, his teacher helped him through the entire sequence, describ¬ 
ing each step as they did it. Next, they would go through the sequence again, 
but now Sam had to do the last step himself (taking off his shoes, putting on his 
shoes). More difficult steps (tying shoes) were worked on individually to give 
Sam more practice on them. When some progress was being made, this aspect 
of the treatment was carried out by the parents. They first observed the teacher 
working with Sam and then discussed the procedure and were shown how to 
make a chart to record Sam's progress. Over a period of weeks, the number 
of steps that Sam had to complete by himself was gradually increased, mov¬ 
ing from the last toward the first. Sam was rewarded each time he dressed or 
undressed, usually with a special treat, such as a favorite breakfast food. In this 
case, the training was successful. By midyear, Sam had mastered dressing and 
undressing. 

Toilet training was another area that Sam’s parents and teachers tack¬ 
led. At home and at school, Sam was rewarded for using the toilet. He was 
checked every hour to see if his pants were dry. If they were, he was praised and 
reminded that when he went to the toilet he would get a reward. Shortly there¬ 
after, Sam would be taken to the toilet, where he would remove his pants and 
sit. If he urinated or defecated, he was given a large reward. If not, he was given 
a small reward just for sitting. As this training was progressing, Sam was also 
taught to associate the word “potty” with going to the toilet. Progress was slow 
at first, and there were many “accidents,” which both teachers and parents were 
instructed to ignore. But Sam soon caught on and began urinating or defecating 
more and more often when he was taken to the bathroom. Then the parents and 
teachers began working on having him tell them when he had to go. When they 
checked to see if his pants were dry, they would tell him to say “potty” when 
he had to go to the toilet. Although there were many ups and downs in Sam’s 
progress, by the end of the year, he was having an average of fewer than two 
accidents per week. 

Sam’s temper tantrums slowed his progress during his first year in the spe¬ 
cial school. They occurred sometimes when he was given a command or when 
a teacher interrupted something he was doing. Not getting a reward during a 
training session also led to tantrums. Sam would scream loudly, throw himself 
to the ground, and flail away with his arms and legs. Several interventions were 
tried. Sam's tantrums usually led to getting his own way, particularly at home. 
For example, a tantrum had often resulted in getting his parents to keep the ceil¬ 
ing fan on, even when they wanted to turn it off. Ignoring the tantrum was the 
first approach. Sam’s teachers and parents simply let the tantrum play itself out, 
acting as if it had not happened. This did not reduce the number of tantrums, so 
“time-out” was tried. Every time a tantrum started, Sam was picked up, carried 
to a special room, and left there for 10 minutes or until the screaming stopped. 
This procedure also failed to have much of an effect on the tantrums and scream¬ 
ing, even with several modifications such as lengthening the time-out period. 



Chapter 21 Autistic Disorder 313 


During Sam’s second year of treatment, many of the first year’s programs 
were continued. Sam, now 6 years old, was responding to more commands, and 
his ability to recognize and point to simple objects increased. In speech therapy, 
he learned to imitate more sounds and some new words (“hello,” “cookie,” and 
“book”), but his progress was slow and uneven. He would seem to master some 
sound or word and then somehow lose it. He was still dressing and undressing 
himself and using the toilet reliably. 

Feeding skills were one of the first targets for the second-year program. 
Although his parents had tried to get him to use a knife, fork, and spoon, Sam 
resisted and ate with his fingers or by licking the food from his plate. Drinking 
from a cup was also a problem. He still used a baby cup with only a small open¬ 
ing at the top. The feeding skills program was implemented by both Sam’s 
teachers and parents and involved a combination of modeling and operant con¬ 
ditioning. Training sessions conducted at mealtime first involved getting Sam to 
use a spoon. Sam was shown how to hold the spoon; then the teacher picked up 
the spoon, saying, “Watch me. You push the spoon in like this and then lift it 
up to your mouth.” Sam did not initially imitate, so the teacher had to guide him 
through the necessary steps: moving his hand and spoon to pick up food, rais¬ 
ing his arm until the spoon was at his mouth, telling him to open his mouth, and 
guiding the spoon in. Praise was provided as each step in the chain was com¬ 
pleted. After many repetitions, he was required to do the last step by himself. 
Gradually, more and more of the steps were done by Sam himself. Successes 
were followed by praise and failures by saying “no” or removing his meal for 
a short time. When eating with a spoon was well established, the training was 
expanded to using a fork and drinking from a cup. In several months, Sam 
was eating and drinking well. 

Sam’s failure to play with other children was also a major focus during the 
second year. The first step was to get him to play near other children. Most of 
his playtime was spent alone, even when other children were in the playroom 
with him. His teacher watched Sam carefully and rewarded him with small bits 
of food whenever he was near another child with autistic disorder. A procedure 
was also used to force Sam to interact with another child. Sam and another child 
would be seated next to each other and given the task of stacking some blocks. 
Each child was, in turn, given a block and prompted to place it on the stack. In 
addition to praising them individually as they stacked each block, both children 
were rewarded with praise and food when they had completed their block tower. 
After repeating this process several times, the program was expanded to include 
the cooperative completion of simple puzzles. “Sam, put the dog in here. Okay 
now, Hannah, put the cat here.” Gradually the prompts were faded out, and the 
children were simply rewarded for their cooperative play. Although this aspect 
of therapy progressed well, transferring these skills to the natural play environ¬ 
ment proved difficult. Attempts were made to have Sam and another child play 
together with toys such as a farm set or a small train. The teacher encouraged 
them to move the objects around, talking to them about what they were doing 



314 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


and rewarding them for following simple commands. Although Sam would usu¬ 
ally follow these commands, his play remained solitary, with little eye contact or 
cooperation with the other child. 

Sam’s self-stimulatory behavior was a final target of the second year. Sam’s 
hand flapping and eye rolling had already decreased somewhat over the past 
year, perhaps because more of his day was being filled with constructive activi¬ 
ties. Now a specific intervention, to be used by Sam’s teachers and his parents, 
was planned. Whenever Sam began hand flapping, he was stopped and told to 
hold his hands still, except when told to move them, for 5 minutes. During the 
5-minute period, he was told to hold his hands in several different positions for 
periods of 30 seconds. If he did not follow the command, the teacher or parent 
moved his hands into the desired position; if he did not maintain the position for 
30 seconds, the teacher or parent held his hands still. Food rewards were pro¬ 
vided for successful completion of each 30-second period. Gradually, the teach¬ 
ers and parents were able to get Sam to comply without moving his hands for 
him or holding him. Then they turned to the eye rolling and implemented a simi¬ 
lar program, having Sam fix his gaze on certain objects around his environment 
whenever he began to roll his eyes. Over a period of several months of training, 
Sam’s self-stimulatory behavior decreased by about 50%. 

At the beginning of his third year in school, Sam, now 7 years old, was given 
an intelligence test and achieved an IQ of 30, a score reflecting severe mental 
retardation. The language and speech training continued, as did the attempts to 
reduce the frequency of his self-stimulatory behavior. His tantrums, which had 
not responded to previous interventions, were becoming worse. In addition to 
screaming and throwing himself on the floor, he now became violent at times. On 
several occasions, he had either punched, bitten, or kicked his sister. His parents 
reported that during these tantrums he became so out of control that they feared 
he might seriously injure someone. Similar episodes occurred in school, usually 
when an ongoing activity was interrupted or he failed at some task. 

Trouble had also emerged on the school bus. All children were required to 
wear seat belts, but Sam would not do so and was often out of his seat. Twice in 
one week, the bus driver stopped the bus and tried to get Sam buckled back into 
his seat. He bit the bus driver once the first time and twice the second. The bus 
company acted quickly and suspended service for Sam. In an initial attempt to 
resolve the problem, Sam was put on haloperidol (Haldol), a drug widely used 
in the treatment of schizophrenia in adults. But after a month of the drug and no 
apparent effect, it was stopped. In the meantime, Sam’s mother had to drive him 
to and from school. He was beginning to miss days or be late when his mother 
had schedule conflicts. 

The seriousness of the tantrum problem and the fact that other treatments 
had not worked led to the implementation of a punishment system. Because 
Sam’s tantrums and violent outbursts were almost always preceded by loud 
screaming, it was decided to try to break up the usual behavior sequence 
and punish the screaming. Whenever Sam began to scream, a mixture of water 



Chapter 21 Autistic Disorder 315 


and Tabasco sauce was squirted into his mouth. The effect of this procedure, 
which was used by both his teachers and parents, was dramatic. The first day of 
the treatment, Sam began screaming and was squirted six times. His response 
to the Tabasco mixture was one of shock and some crying, which stopped 
quickly after he was allowed to rinse out his mouth. The next day, he was 
squirted with the Tabasco twice. The third and fourth days, he did not scream at 
all. The fifth day, he had one screaming episode; thereafter, he neither screamed 
nor had a severe temper tantrum again for the rest of the year. 

Sam’s progress in other areas was not so dramatic. His vocabulary slowly 
expanded, as he learned to say more words and recognize more and more 
objects. But his performance was highly variable from day to day. His self¬ 
stimulatory behavior continued, although at a level below that which had been 
present earlier. He remained isolated, preferring to be alone rather than with 
other children. 


Discussion 


Autistic disorder was first described in 1943 by a Harvard psychiatrist, Leo 
Kanner, who noticed a group of disturbed children that behaved differently than 
children with mental retardation or with schizophrenia. He named the syndrome 
early infantile autism because they had an extreme autistic aloneness that shut 
out anything from the outside. Kanner considered autistic aloneness the most 
fundamental symptom, but he also found that these children had been unable 
from the beginning of life to relate to other people, were severely limited in lan¬ 
guage, and had an obsessive desire that everything about them remain exactly 
the same. Despite its early description by Kanner and others, the disorder was 
not accepted into official diagnostic nomenclature until the publication of the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-III) in 1980 
(APA). In DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) autistic disorder is classified as one of the 
pervasive developmental disorders. 

A major feature of autistic disorder is abnormality in social development 
(Volkmar, Chawarska, & Klin, 2005). Children with autistic disorder have a lack 
of interest in or difficulty relating to people, which is found from the very begin¬ 
ning of life. Infants with autistic disorder are often reported to be “good babies” 
because they do not place any demands on their parents. They do not fret or 
demand attention, but nor do they reach out or smile or look at their mothers 
when being fed. When they are picked up or cuddled, they often arch their bod¬ 
ies away from their caretakers instead of molding themselves against the adult as 
many other babies do. They are content to sit quietly in their playpens for hours, 
never paying attention to other people. After infancy, they do not form typical 
attachments with people but may become extremely attached to mechanical 
objects such as refrigerators or vacuum cleaners. Normally, developing infants 
show an ability to pay attention to movements by people as early as the second 




316 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


day of life, but this ability is missing in autistic children even by 2 years of age 
(Klin, Lin, Gorrindo, Ramsay, & Jones, 2009). This inborn ability, also present 
in newly hatched chicks and a wide range of other species, is the basis for social 
interaction, and children with autistic disorder instead focus on inanimate and 
random movements. As children, they often do not initiate interactions with oth¬ 
ers, use facial expressions to communicate with others, share enjoyment with 
others, or offer empathy to others (Bishop, Ganahan, & Lord, 2007). They are 
less able to identify emotional expressions on others’ faces, especially when 
the expressions are subtle (Rump, Giovannelli, Minshew, & Strauss, 2009). 
They rapidly fall behind their peers in development. Clearly, this feature was 
very characteristic of Sam. Although he did not actively avoid human contact or 
develop an attachment with a mechanical object, he was almost totally asocial. 

Communication deficits are a second major feature of autism. Mutism— 
complete absence of speech—is common, as was true with Sam. About 50% of 
all children with autistic disorder never learn to speak (Paul, 1987). When they 
do speak, peculiarities are often found, including echolalia, where children echo, 
usually with remarkable fidelity, what they have heard another person say. In 
delayed echolalia, the child may not repeat the sentence or phrase until hours 
or weeks after hearing it. Another abnormality common in the speech of chil¬ 
dren with autistic disorder is pronoun reversal. They refer to themselves as “he,” 
“you,” or by their own proper names; they seldom use the pronouns “I” or “me” 
and then only when referring to others. 

The ability or inability to speak is often an effective means of predicting 
the later adjustment of children with autistic disorder, an additional indication 
of the central role of language. Billstedt, Gillberg, and Gillberg (2007) followed 
up a community sample of 105 people with autistic disorder from early child¬ 
hood until young adulthood. They found that those who had developed some 
spoken language by age 5 had a better outcome as adults than those who had 
not. In fact, language development by age 5 was the best predictor of adult out¬ 
come among these individuals with autistic disorders. Based on these findings, 
we would predict a relatively poor outcome for Sam. 

A third major feature of autistic disorder is restricted or stereotyped inter¬ 
ests (Volkmar et al., 2005), including compulsive and ritualistic activity, such 
as a fascination with spinning objects, as shown by Sam. They may have dif¬ 
ficulty walking but be proficient at twirling objects and in performing ritualis¬ 
tic hand movements. Other rhythmic movements, such as endless body rocking, 
seem to please them. They may also become preoccupied with manipulating a 
mechanical object and be very upset when interrupted. These behaviors may 
serve the purpose of soothing or occupying them (Leekam, Prior, & Uljarevic, 
2011). Almost all children with autism show some type of repetitive sensori¬ 
motor behavior (Lord, 2010). Furthermore, children with autistic disorder often 
become extremely upset over changes in daily routine and their surroundings. 
An offer of milk in a different drinking cup or a rearrangement of furniture may 
make them cry or bring on a temper tantrum. Even common greetings must not 



Chapter 21 Autistic Disorder 317 


vary. These symptoms suggest a compulsive need for stability (Smith et ah, 
2009). In play, they may continually line up toys or construct intricate patterns 
out of household objects. They engage in much less symbolic or make-believe 
play than either normal or mentally retarded children of the same mental age, 
showing impaired imagination (Leekam et ah, 2011). They may become pre¬ 
occupied with train schedules, subway routes, or number sequences, and even 
if the focus of their preoccupation is an appropriate one for children, such as 
dinosaurs, the intensity of it is debilitating, and it interferes with their daily lives 
(Lord, 2010). Clearly, Sam displayed many of these behaviors. 

In addition to these three major signs, many children with autistic disorder 
have problems in eating, often refusing food or eating only one or a few kinds 
of food. This hyperresponsiveness, an aversion to new stimuli, is also seen 
in oversensitivity to new sounds or tactile experiences. Hyperresponsiveness 
was once thought to be unique to children with autistic disorder, but it is actu¬ 
ally strongly linked to mental age; it is observed among children who are men¬ 
tally retarded as well (Baranek, Boyd, Poe, David, & Watson, 2007). Often the 
children have sensory problems. Like Sam, some children with autistic disor¬ 
der are first thought to be deaf because they never respond to any sound; some 
even seem to be insensitive to sound or light. Development is usually delayed, 
with frequent difficulty in becoming toilet trained; head banging and other self- 
injurious behaviors are common (Bishop et al., 2007). Children with autistic 
disorder whose intelligence score is in the normal range are able to describe 
their simple emotional experiences such as anger or happiness, but when 
describing complex emotions such as embarrassment or pride, their accounts are 
very simplified, even impoverished, and do not fit the context in which they were 
described as having occurred (Losh & Capps, 2006). 

Autistic disorder is being diagnosed more frequently (Barbaresi, Katusic, 
Colligan, Weaver, & Jacobsen, 2005). From 1980 to 1983, the incidence was 5.5 
per 100,000 children, but for 1995 to 1997, it was 44.9 per 100,000, an 8.2-fold 
increase. The increase was most noticeable after the publication of the DSM- 
III-R in 1988 (APA), which broadened the diagnostic criteria and increased 
awareness of autism. It is probable that the increase in cases is at least in 
part due to these changes rather than to an actual increase in the disorder. In 
addition, the fact that autistic disorder is now being diagnosed at a younger age 
increases the prevalence rate (Wazana, Bresnahan, & Kline, 2007). Special edu¬ 
cation services are available for children with a diagnosis of autism, so clinicians 
may be more likely to make that diagnosis so children who are having diffi¬ 
culty would be able to receive services (Barbaresi, Colligan, Weaver, & Katusic, 
2009). It is likely that many real cases of autistic disorder used to go undetected, 
and it is still not clear whether autistic disorder is becoming more common or 
just being better identified. 

Boys have rates of autistic disorder that are three to four times higher than 
girls (Volkmar et al., 2005). There is a high comorbidity with seizure disorders. 
There has been a growing interest in autism spectrum disorders, particularly in 



318 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Asperger’s syndrome. There is controversy about whether the spectrum disor¬ 
ders are really separate disorders, and the diagnostic criteria are not well defined 
(Volkmar, Lord, Bailey, Schultz, & Klin, 2004). Without clearly defined criteria, 
such disorders, especially Asperger’s syndrome, are likely to be overdiagnosed. 
Clinicians must be cautious about doing this because labeling a child who may 
just have poor social skills as having an autistic disorder could have negative 
implications for the child and family. 

About 75 to 80% of people with autistic disorder are mentally retarded 
(Kabot, Masi, & Segal, 2003). A very small number of individuals with autis¬ 
tic disorder have the rare savant syndrome, a discrete area of outstanding ability 
such as calendar calculation or art, music, or memory skills in some very spe¬ 
cific area (Heaton & Wallace, 2004). Savant syndrome is associated with autistic 
disorder but is not understood. 

What happens to such severely disturbed children when they reach adult¬ 
hood? Kanner (1973) reported the adult status of some of the children whom he 
had described in his original paper. Two developed epileptic seizures; by 1966, 
one of them had died, and the other was in a state mental hospital. Four others 
had spent most of their lives in institutions. One had remained mute but was 
working on a farm and as an orderly in a nursing home. The last two made at 
least somewhat satisfactory recoveries. Although both still lived with their parents 
and had little social life, they were gainfully employed and had some recreational 
interests. From his review of early follow-up studies, Lotter (1978) concluded that 
only 5 to 17% of autistic children had a relatively good outcome in adulthood. 
Most of the remaining children had a poor outcome, and 50% were institutional¬ 
ized. Recent studies have reached similar conclusions (Nordin & Gillberg, 1998). 

Etiological Considerations 

Investigators believe that neurobiological factors are the cause of autistic disor¬ 
der (Volkmar et al., 2005). A number of neurological abnormalities have been 
documented. Toddlers with autistic disorder have heads that are 10% larger in 
volume than those without autistic disorder (Volkmar et al., 2004). This differ¬ 
ence is not present at birth, and the overgrowth during toddlerhood and child¬ 
hood tends to level off so that differences are not so marked during adulthood. 
The reason for these differences is not yet understood. Abnormalities are also 
found in the amygdala, hippocampus, and cerebellum; the nature and causes 
of these abnormalities are being investigated. Furthermore, the prevalence of 
autism in children whose mothers had rubella during the prenatal period is 
approximately 10 times higher than in the general population of children. 

Genetic factors in the etiology of autistic disorder are well established. 
Siblings of children with autistic disorder have a 2% chance of also having the 
disorder (McBride, Anderson, & Shapiro, 1996). Although this is a small per¬ 
centage, it represents a 50-fold increase in risk as compared to the morbidity risk 
in the general population. Further evidence of the importance of genetic factors 



Chapter 21 Autistic Disorder 319 


in autistic disorder is provided by twin studies. Monozygotic twins have con¬ 
cordance rates of over 60%, whereas dizygotic twins have concordance rates of 
0% (Muhle, Trentacoste, & Rapin, 2004). At least 3 to 4 but maybe as many as 
10 different genes are believed to interact to result in the phenotype of autis¬ 
tic disorder (Volkmar et al., 2004). Some argue that there is not a single cause 
of autistic disorder and that separate genes may be responsible for each of its 
three core features, social abnormalities, communication deficits, and restricted 
or stereotyped interests (Happe, Ronald, & Plomin, 2006). 

Family studies reveal delayed language acquisition and social deficits in 
some nonautistic relatives of index cases with autistic disorder (Piren, Palmer, 
Jacobi, Childress, & Arndt, 1997). Taken together, the evidence from family and 
twin studies supports a genetic basis for autistic disorder. In Sam’s case, there 
was no evidence of any neurological abnormality, nor was there any family his¬ 
tory of autism. However, his older sister did have a learning disability. 

A controversial view that is increasingly supported by research evidence— 
the prenatal androgen theory—proposes that autism is due to excessive expo¬ 
sure to testosterone during the fetal stage of development (Klin, 2009). This 
exposure creates an “extreme male brain,” a way of conceptualizing autistic 
traits, one that excels in rules and facts of systems rather than empathy and 
interpersonal relatedness (Auyeung et ah, 2009). Levels of testosterone during 
fetal development are linked to both boys’ and girls’ autistic symptoms during 
childhood. More research is needed to evaluate this interesting theory. 

Genetic factors alone may not be the only etiological contributor to autistic 
disorder. It is possible that genes create a susceptibility to environmental fac¬ 
tors, such as toxins (Lawler, Croen, Grether, & Van de Water, 2004). There is 
no definitive evidence at this time that any specific toxin or teratogen is related, 
but there is some evidence implicating prenatal exposure to valproic acid, a drug 
used to treat seizures and bipolar disorder, and thalidomide, a drug that has been 
used in the past to treat morning sickness during pregnancy (Newschaffer et 
al., 2007). In addition, links to neurotoxins in air pollution, pesticides in food, 
and insecticides are being researched further. Others have found that prenatal 
problems, such as maternal viral infections and vaginal bleeding during preg¬ 
nancy, and birth complications, such as emergency caesarean section, prolonged 
labor, and multiple births (twins or triplets) are more likely among those with 
autistic disorder (Brimacombe, Ming, & Lamendola, 2007). 

There are also cognitive explanations for autistic disorder. One conceptu¬ 
alizes autistic disorder as stemming from a deficit in social cognition, such as 
not having a theory of mind, and the other frames it in terms of broader dif¬ 
ficulties with information processing, such as problems with executive brain 
function (Happe et al., 2006). Theory of mind is the ability to understand the 
mental states of others, including their perspective, feelings, and goals. Autistic 
individuals have deficits in theory of mind and also in broader social cognition 
and communicative abilities, such as empathy and imitation (Tager-Flusberg, 
2007). Recent research suggests that the mechanism underlying this deficit may 



320 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


lie in problems with the mirror neuron system. The mirror neuron system con¬ 
sists of networks of neurons in the brain that activate in similar patterns whether 
one is performing an activity or watching someone perform that activity, such 
as grasping an object (Oberman & Ramachandran, 2007). This mirror neuron 
system is thought to underlie many cognitive tasks, including motor, perceptual, 
and verbal functions, and may allow people to run internal simulations of the 
experiences of others and use these simulations to make predictions about them. 
Research has shown that people with autistic disorder do not have mirror neu¬ 
ron systems that function like those of others, and problems in this system could 
explain many different symptoms of autistic disorder, such as pronoun reversal, 
lack of imitative behavior, and a tendency to respond to the emotions of others in 
odd ways. These cognitive and neurological theories of the etiology of autistic 
disorder are not independent from other theories of etiology and may emerge 
from genetic or environmental sources. 

There has been tremendous focus in the popular media on vaccines, spe¬ 
cifically on thimerosal, a preservative used in vaccines, as playing a role in autis¬ 
tic disorder, following a research report published in 1998 that speculated about 
such a link. However, that report was retracted because it was based on insuf¬ 
ficient evidence and because one of the authors had a financial incentive in a 
lawsuit against the vaccine manufacturers (Fleck, 2004). A careful investigation 
of the original data revealed that the evidence was falsified, and the report was 
actually a fraud, based on fictitious data (Godlee, Smith, & Marcovitch, 2011). 
A flurry of research on vaccines followed the initial publication of the fraudu¬ 
lent report, and no link with autistic disorder has been found (Parker, Schwartz, 
Todd, & Pickering, 2004). Unfortunately, many parents have withheld vaccines 
for their children out of fear due to the media reports, and as a result, many chil¬ 
dren are now at risk for those infectious diseases. 

Treatment 

Numerous medications have been tried with autistic disorder, most commonly 
antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol) and antidepressants (Palermo & Curatolo, 
2004). These medications can help in managing stereotyped motor behavior, 
self-injury, aggression, hyperactivity, and sleep problems. However, medication 
does not improve the core symptoms of autistic disorder (Sung, Fung, Cai, & 
Ooi, 2010). 

The major psychological treatment for autism is behavior therapy. As 
we saw in Sam's case, it requires a great expenditure of time and effort. 
Furthermore, autistic children have several problems that make teaching them 
particularly difficult. They have difficulty adjusting to changes in routine, such 
as substitute teachers. Their self-stimulatory behavior interferes with effective 
teaching, and finding reinforcers that motivate autistic children can be challeng¬ 
ing. Whereas children without autism are often motivated by praise, this is not 
the case for many children with autism. 



Chapter 21 Autistic Disorder 321 


In general, behavior therapists focus on reliably assessed, observable behav¬ 
iors and manipulate the consequences these behaviors elicit from the environ¬ 
ment. As in Sam’s case, desirable behaviors (e.g., speech, playing with other 
children) are rewarded, and undesirable ones (e.g., hand flapping, screaming) are 
either ignored or punished. The desired behaviors are broken down into smaller 
elements that are learned first and then assembled into a whole. A good example 
of this procedure was seen in the procedures used to try to get Sam to speak. 
Modeling is a frequent adjunct in these operant behavior therapy programs. 

Intensive behavioral intervention programs have shown significant improve¬ 
ments in preschool children’s cognitive abilities, self-care skills, language, and 
positive social behavior (Remington et al., 2007). Ivar Lovaas developed the 
intensive behavior therapy program with very young (under 4 years old) children 
with autistic disorder (Lovaas, 1987). Therapy encompassed all aspects of the 
children’s lives for more than 40 hours a week for more than 2 years. Parents 
were trained extensively so that treatment could continue during almost all wak¬ 
ing hours of the children’s lives. The 19 children receiving this intensive treat¬ 
ment were compared to 40 control children who received a similar treatment for 
less than 10 hours per week. All children were rewarded for being less aggres¬ 
sive, more compliant, and more socially appropriate, including talking and play¬ 
ing with other children. 

The results were dramatic and encouraging for the intensive therapy group. 
Their measured IQs averaged 83 in first grade (after about 2 years in the inten¬ 
sive therapy) compared to about 55 for the controls; 12 of the 19 reached the 
normal range as compared to only 2 (of 40) in the control group. Furthermore, 
9 out of the 19 intensives were promoted to second grade in a normal public 
school, whereas only 1 of the much larger control group achieved this level of 
normal functioning. A 4-year follow-up showed that they had maintained their 
gains (McEachin, Smith, & Lovaas, 1993). A recent randomized control trial of 
this treatment approach confirmed that it was more effective than a parent train¬ 
ing control group, although the gains were not as impressive as those reported 
originally (Volkmar et al., 2004). Moreover, other types of treatment have been 
shown to be effective as well. 

This ambitious study confirms the need for heavy involvement of both pro¬ 
fessionals and parents in dealing with the extreme challenge of autistic disorder. 
Such intensive treatment is expensive and time consuming, costing on average 
about $40,000 a year for each child (Shattuck & Grosse, 2007). However, the 
long-term dependence and loss of productive work in less intensively treated 
children with autistic disorder may represent a greater cost to society than a 
treatment that enables some of these children to achieve a normal level of func¬ 
tioning. Even with intensive early intervention, though, most children will not 
recover or have normal functioning but will continue to have significant symp¬ 
toms and impairment (Shea, 2004). 

Finally, families of children with autism experience a great deal of stress. 
Extra financial burdens and the strain of the symptoms and intensive nature of 



322 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


treatment can be great. Although the majority of marriages of parents of a child 
with autism survive, there is a doubling of the risk of divorce (Hartley et al., 2010). 


Discussion Questions 


1. To intervene in Sam’s tantrums and violent outbursts, the therapy involved 
squirting Tabasco sauce into his mouth when he started a tantrum by scream¬ 
ing. Do you think this form of intervention is ethical? What are the pros and 
cons of using such a treatment? 

2. Had you heard before about the vaccine controversy related to autistic dis¬ 
order? Despite repeated investigations that have exonerated vaccines, many 
parents are still refusing to vaccinate their children. What should researchers, 
physicians, and the media do about this? 

3. Why are there increases in the number of diagnosed cases of autistic disorder? 

4 . The most effective treatment for autistic disorder is early intensive behavior 
therapy, which is very costly. What ethical dilemmas does this pose for our 
society? How should we balance the need for autism treatment with the need 
for preventative health care for other children with our limited health-care 
dollars? 




CHAPTER 22 


Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 

Disorder 


Ken Wilson’s mother contacted the clinic in the middle of November about 
her 7-year-old son, a first-grader. She explained that Ken was having trouble at 
school, both academically and socially. The school psychologist had said that he 
was hyperactive. The clinic scheduled an initial appointment for Ken and both 
parents. 


Social History 


The case was assigned to a clinical psychology intern, who met the family in the 
clinic’s waiting room. After a brief chat with all of them, he explained that he 
would hist like to see the parents alone and later spend some time with Ken. 

Mr. and Mrs. Wilson had been married for 12 years. He was a business 
manager, and she was a homemaker. Ken was the middle of three children; his 
older sister was 9, and his younger brother was 4. Neither sibling was having 
any apparent problems. Mrs. Wilson had a full-term pregnancy with Ken. The 
delivery was without complication, although labor was fairly long. The therapist 
explained that he would like to get an overview of the problem as it existed now. 

According to his parents, Ken’s current problems began in kindergarten. His 
teacher frequently sent notes home about his disciplinary problems in the class¬ 
room. In fact, there had been concerns about promoting Ken to the first grade. 
The final result was a “trial promotion.” Everyone hoped that Ken would mature 
and do much better in hist grade, but his behavior became even more disruptive. 
Ken’s mother had received negative reports about him from his teacher several 
times over the first 2 months of school. His teacher reported that he didn’t com¬ 
plete his work, was disruptive to the class, and behaved aggressively. 

The therapist then asked about the parents’ perception of Ken at home and 
his developmental history. They described him as a difficult infant, much more 


323 




324 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


so than his older sister. He cried frequently and was described as a colicky baby 
by their pediatrician. He did not eat well, and his sleep was often fitful and rest¬ 
less. As Ken grew, his mother reported even more difficulties with him. He was 
into everything. Verbal reprimands, which had been effective in controlling his 
sister’s behavior, seemed to have no effect on him. When either parent tried to 
stop him from doing something dangerous, such as playing with an expensive 
vase or turning the stove off and on, he would often have a temper tantrum that 
included throwing things, breaking toys, and screaming. His relationship with 
his sister was poor. He bit her on several occasions and seemed to take delight in 
trying to get her into trouble. 

His parents described a similar pattern of aggressiveness in Ken’s behav¬ 
ior with the neighborhood children. Many of the parents no longer allowed their 
children to play with Ken. They also reported that he had low frustration toler¬ 
ance and a short attention span. He could not stay with puzzles and games for 
more than a few minutes and often reacted angrily when his brief efforts did not 
produce success. Going out for dinner had become impossible because of his 
misbehavior in restaurants. Even mealtimes at home had become unpleasant. 
Ken’s parents had begun to argue frequently about how to deal with him. 

Toward the end of the first session, the therapist brought Ken to his office 
while his parents remained in the clinic waiting room. Ken initially maintained 
that he did not understand why he was at the clinic, but later he admitted that he 
was getting into a lot of trouble at school. He agreed that it would probably be a 
good idea to try to do something about his misbehavior. 

Ken and his parents were brought together for the final minutes of the first 
session. The therapist explained that the next several sessions would be devoted 
to conducting a more thorough assessment, including visits to the Wilson’s 
home and Ken’s school. The parents signed release forms so the therapist could 
obtain information from their pediatrician and the school. The following infor¬ 
mation was gathered through these sources and from further interviews with the 
parents. 


The Current Problem 


School records generally corroborated his parents’ description of Ken’s behav¬ 
ior in kindergarten. His teacher described him as being “distractible, moody, 
aggressive,” and a “discipline problem.” Toward the end of kindergarten, his 
intelligence and academic achievement were tested. Although his IQ was placed 
at 120, he did not perform very well on reading and mathematics achievement 
tests. An interview with Ken’s first-grade teacher provided information that 
agreed with other reports. Ken’s teacher complained that he was frequently out 
of his seat, seldom sat still when he was supposed to, did not complete assign¬ 
ments, and had poor peer relations. Ken seemed indifferent to efforts at disciplin¬ 
ing him. Ken’s teacher also completed a short form of the Conners Rating Scale 




Chapter 22 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 325 


Table 22.1 Teacher's Ratings of Ken's Behavior on the Short Form of the 
Conners Rating Scale 


Degree of Activity 


(0) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

Observation: Classroom Behavior 

Not at Just a 

Pretty 

Very 

All 

Little 

Much 

Much 

Constantly fidgeting 

Demands must be met immediately—easily frustrated 



X 

X 

Restless or overactive 




X 

Excitable, impulsive 

Inattentive, easily distracted 



X 

X 

Fails to finish things he starts—short attention span 
Cries often and easily 


X 


X 

Disturbs other children 


X 



Mood changes quickly and drastically 

Temper outbursts, explosive and unpredictable 
behavior 


X 


X 


Source: Sprague, Cohen, and Werry (1974) 


(Sprague, Cohen, & Werry, 1974) about Ken’s behavior. The instrument verified 
the picture of hyperactive behavior that had already emerged (see Table 22.1). 

The therapist arranged to spend a morning in Ken’s classroom. During 
that time, Ken was out of his seat inappropriately six times. On one occasion, 
he jumped up to look out the window when a noise, probably a car backfiring, 
was heard. He went to talk to other children three times. Ken got up twice and 
just began walking quickly around the classroom. Even when he stayed seated, 
he was often not working and instead was fidgeting or bothering other children. 
Any noise, even another child coughing or dropping a pencil, distracted him 
from his work. When his teacher spoke to him, he did not seem to hear; it was 
not until the teacher had begun yelling at him that he paid any attention. 

Subsequent sessions with Ken’s parents focused on his current behavior 
at home. The pattern that had begun earlier in Ken’s childhood continued. He 
still got along poorly with his sister, had difficulty sitting still at mealtimes, and 
reacted with temper tantrums when demands were made of him. His behavior 
had also taken on a daredevil quality, as illustrated by his climbing out of his 
second-story bedroom window and racing his bicycle down the hill of a heav¬ 
ily trafficked local street. Indeed, his daring acts seemed to be the only way he 
could get any positive attention from his neighborhood peers, who seemed to be 
mostly afraid of him. He had no really close friends. 

Mr. Wilson missed two of these sessions because of his business schedule. 
Most days he had to commute to work, a two-hour train trip each way. During a 








326 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


session he missed, Mrs. Wilson hinted that they had marital problems. When this 
was brought up directly, she agreed that their marriage was not as good now as 
it once had been. Their arguments centered on how to handle Ken. Mrs. Wilson 
had come to believe that severe physical punishment was the only answer. She 
described an active, growing dislike of Ken and feared that he might never change. 

The next time Mr. Wilson was present, the therapist asked him about his 
child-rearing philosophy. He admitted that he took more of a “boys will be 
boys” approach. In fact, he reported that as a child, he was like Ken. He had 
“grown out of it” and expected Ken would, too. As a result, he let Ken get away 
with things for which Mrs. Wilson would have punished him. The couple’s argu¬ 
ments, which had recently become more heated and frequent, usually occurred 
after Mr. Wilson had arrived home from work. Mrs. Wilson, after a particularly 
exasperating day with Ken, would try to get Mr. Wilson to discipline Ken. “Just 
wait until your father gets home” was a familiar refrain. But Mr. Wilson would 
refuse and accuse his wife of overreacting; the battle would then begin. 

The next week, the therapist visited the Wilson home, arriving just before 
Ken and his sister got home from school. The first part of the visit was unevent¬ 
ful, but at about 4:30 p.m., Ken and his sister got into a fight over who was win¬ 
ning a game. Ken broke the game, and his sister came crying to her mother, who 
began shouting at Ken. Ken tried to explain his behavior by saying that his sister 
had been cheating. His mother ordered him to his room; shortly thereafter, when 
she heard him crying, she went up and told him he could come out. 

The children ate their dinner at 5:30 p.m.; Mrs. Wilson planned to wait until 
her husband came home later to have hers. The meal began with Ken complain¬ 
ing that he did not like anything on his plate. He picked at his food for a few 
minutes and then started making faces at his sister. Mrs. Wilson yelled at him 
to stop making the faces and eat his dinner. When she turned her back, he began 
shoving food from his plate onto his sister’s. As she resisted, Ken knocked over 
his glass of milk, which broke on the floor. Ken’s mother was enraged at this 
point. She looked as if she was ready to hit Ken, but she calmed herself, perhaps 
because of the therapist’s presence. Although she told Ken that he would be in 
big trouble when his father got home, nothing happened. When Mr. Wilson came 
home, he made light of the incident and refused to punish Ken. Even though 
Mrs. Wilson's exasperation was obvious, she said nothing. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


The therapist conceptualized Ken’s problem in an operant-conditioning frame¬ 
work. Although open to possible biological causes of Ken’s behavior, the 
therapist believed that a structured program of rewards and punishments— 
contingency management—would help. Treatment would then involve trying to 
increase the frequency of positive behaviors (complying with parental requests, 
interacting positively with his sister, staying in his seat in the classroom) by 




Chapter 22 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 327 


providing positive consequences for them. Similarly, undesirable behaviors 
should be followed by negative consequences. It was explained to Ken’s parents 
that many of these undesirable behaviors had actually been producing positive 
results for him. His tantrums, for example, frequently allowed him to have his 
own way. The complicating feature was the attitude of Ken’s parents. Would 
either of them be willing to engage in the considerable effort required to make a 
contingency management system work? To try to counter this potential problem, 
the therapist, after explaining the results of his overall assessment and the broad 
outlines of his treatment plan, asked both parents to try to put aside their cur¬ 
rent attitudes for a brief period while they implemented a simple, scaled-down 
version of the overall plan. The hope was that a simple intervention, directed at 
only a couple of problem areas, would produce visible, quick results. This small 
change might be sufficient to increase the parents’ enthusiasm and allow a com¬ 
plete therapeutic package to be instituted later. 

Two target behaviors were selected—leaving his seat in the classroom and 
inappropriate behavior at mealtimes at home. Mealtime behavior problems were 
defined as complaining about the food served; kicking his sister under the table; 
not staying in his chair; and laughing, giggling, or making faces. During the next 
week, the parents were instructed to record the frequency of disruptive behavior 
at mealtimes as well as several other target behaviors (temper tantrums, fights 
with siblings, and noncompliance with parental requests) that could be targets 
for later interventions. The next day, Ken’s teacher was contacted. She agreed to 
keep a record of the number of times Ken was out of his seat each day. 

During the next session, an intervention was planned. The records of the 
past week indicated that every meal had been problematic. Ken had also been 
out of his seat when he was supposed to be working at his desk for an aver¬ 
age of nine times per day. The therapist explained to Ken and his parents that in 
the next week daily rewards would be made available if Ken was not disruptive 
at mealtimes and if he reduced the number of times he was out of his seat at 
school. Everyone agreed that Ken would be allowed to select an extra half hour 
of television watching, a favorite dessert, or a game to be played with one of 
his parents if his behavior met an agreed-on criterion. The initial criterion was 
being out of his seat less than five times per day at school and being nondis- 
ruptive for at least one of the two meals eaten at home each day. The therapist 
showed Ken’s parents how to make a chart that was to be posted on the refriger¬ 
ator. Ken’s teacher would send a daily note home indicating how many times he 
was out of his seat and that number, along with checks for a “good” meal, would 
be entered on the chart. Ken’s teacher was contacted after the session, and the 
program was explained. She agreed to send home a daily record of the number 
of times Ken was out of his seat. 

At the beginning of the next session, Ken’s parents were clearly pleased. 
They had brought their chart with them; some changes had obviously occurred. 
Ken had met the criterion on six of the seven days. The average number of 
times he was out of his seat went from 9 to 3.6, and he had been unpleasant at 



328 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


mealtimes only five times (two of these occurred on Saturday, resulting in his 
single failure to obtain a reward). During the next several sessions, the parents 
and the therapist worked on expanding the program. Temper tantrums, fighting 
with his siblings, and noncompliance with parental requests had all been frequent 
the previous week. Ken’s parents now were eager to attempt to deal with them. 

Of the three targets, noncompliance proved to be the most difficult to address. 
It presented such a large array of possibilities that a specific description of a cri¬ 
terion was problematic. A program was developed that involved the following 
components: Temper tantrums would lead to a time-out procedure in which Ken 
would have to go to his room and stay quietly for 10 minutes. Fighting was han¬ 
dled first by a simple request to stop. If that was ineffective, the time-out proce¬ 
dure would be employed. To try to get Ken to comply with parental requests such 
as going to bed or to stop teasing his sister, his parents were instructed to make the 
requests calmly and clearly to be sure he heard them. If he did not comply, they 
were to give him one reminder, again in a calm fashion; if that failed, he would 
be sent to his room. The therapist stressed to the parents that their requests to stop 
or do something had to be made calmly and that time-out should also be admin¬ 
istered calmly. Finally, the parents were instructed to provide social reinforce¬ 
ment for cooperative play and being pleasant at meals by simply telling Ken how 
pleased they were when they saw him playing nicely with his siblings. 

Based on the records from the previous weeks, it looked as though Ken 
would have experienced about 20 time-outs if the new system had been in effect. 
It was therefore decided that if Ken was sent to his room fewer than 10 times, 
he would receive a special end-of-week reward, a trip to the theater to see a 
film. The mealtime procedure was kept in effect, and as before, a chart was to 
be completed showing school behavior, mealtimes, and frequency of time-outs. 
This time, the parents were also asked to keep a log of the number of times they 
praised Ken and of the specific details of instances of noncompliance. The latter 
feature was included to make sure the parents’ requests were not unreasonable. 

Meanwhile, the therapist contacted Ken’s teacher and increased the scope 
of the school program. The teacher was asked to maintain her recordkeeping of 
Ken’s being out of his seat, but she was also to praise Ken as often as possi¬ 
ble when he was working appropriately. The daily report card was expanded 
to include the number of assignments completed and the number of aggressive 
interactions with peers, defined broadly to include both physical and verbal 
aggression. Other instances of disruptive behavior (being noisy, making faces) 
were also to be recorded. The records from this week were to be used in plan¬ 
ning another intervention during the next session with the parents. 

At the session following the implementation of the time-out procedure, the 
parents were decidedly less enthusiastic than they had been the previous week. 
Although the improvement in mealtime behavior had been maintained, Ken had 
been sent to his room 17 times over the course of the week and thus did not get 
his Sunday trip to the movie. It seemed that time-out was not an effective con¬ 
sequence for Ken. The therapist asked the parents for more details on how they 



Chapter 22 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 329 


were using the procedure. It turned out that Ken had lots of toys in his room, so 
the therapist decided to change the system. In an effort to increase the effective¬ 
ness of time-out, Ken’s toys were put away so that time-out consisted of sitting 
on his bed with no toys to play with or books to look at. Furthermore, all the 
at-home targets were linked to a daily reward (one of the three described earlier). 
Specifically, Ken was to get 2 points for each pleasant meal, 2 points if he had 
only one time-out before dinner, and 2 points for none after dinner. 

The expanded school program was also converted to a point system. The 
teacher’s records for the previous week indicated that Ken had been out of his 
seat an average of three times per day, had completed 55% of his assignments, 
and was either aggressive or disruptive five times during the average day. A set of 
new criteria was adopted for school and linked to points: 2 points for being out 
of his seat less than three times per day, 2 points for completing 70% or more of 
his assignments, and 2 points for reducing the frequency of aggressive behavior 
or disruptiveness to less than three times per day. Thus, Ken could earn 12 points 
on each school day and 6 on weekends. The criterion for one of the daily rewards 
was set at 8 points on a school day and 4 points on weekends. In addition, a 
weekly total of 54 points would result in Ken’s being taken to see a movie. 

The system now appeared to be working well. During one typical week, Ken 
earned 58 points and thus got his trip to the movies. In addition, he met the cri¬ 
terion for a daily reward each day. At home, he averaged only one time-out per 
day, and 12 of 14 meals had been without incident. At school, he was out of his 
seat slightly less than twice per day, completed an average of 70% of his assign¬ 
ments, and was either aggressive or disruptive fewer than three times per day. 

For the following week, the criteria for school behavior were increased 
again. Points could be earned for being out of his seat less than twice per day, 
completing 80% of his assignments, and being aggressive or disruptive less than 
twice per day. At home, the point system was left unchanged. The criterion for a 
daily reward was raised to 10 for school days and 6 on weekends; the criterion 
for the end-of-week reward was raised to 66. In addition, a new daily reward was 
added to the program—a bedtime story from Ken’s father. The parents were also 
encouraged to continue providing praise for good behavior. The therapist called 
Ken’s teacher to discuss a similar tactic for the classroom. 

The program continued to evolve over the next few weeks, and Ken made 
steady progress. By the 14th week, it was clear that Ken’s behavior had dramati¬ 
cally changed, and his academic performance was improving. At this point, ses¬ 
sions were held only once every 2 weeks, and the family was followed for 3 
more months. Increased emphasis was placed on teaching Ken’s parents the gen¬ 
eral principles that they had been following so that when problems arose they 
would be able to handle them on their own by modifying the system. 

Both Ken’s parents and his teacher were also reporting changes in Ken that 
had not been targets of the intervention. He was described as being less moody, 
more pleasant, and more able to deal with frustration. He had also begun to 
form some friendships and was being invited to other children’s homes to play. 



330 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


Although Ken was still somewhat difficult to handle, his parents now believed 
that they had some skills they could use. Ken’s mother reported that she now felt 
much more positive toward him. The couple also indicated that their arguments 
had become much less frequent. Two steps remained. First, the daily rewards were 
phased out. Instead, the parents were to provide social reinforcement for good 
behavior during the day. The rewards were still provided, but in a less formal man¬ 
ner in which they were not linked explicitly to the number of points earned during 
the day. 

Finally, the formal contingency aspect of the weekend reward was dropped. 
A “good week” still led to a special treat or activity but was not linked specifi¬ 
cally to a particular criterion. Ken’s behavior remained stable, and treatment was 
concluded. 


Discussion 


According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM- 
TV-TR ; APA, 2000), Ken met the criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disor¬ 
der (ADHD), one of the subcategories in the manual’s section headed “Disorders 
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence.” This large sec¬ 
tion encompasses disorders of the intellect (e.g., mental retardation), overt behav¬ 
ior (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder), and pervasive 
disorders of development (e.g., autistic disorder, discussed in Chapter 21). 

The term attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder reflects the prevailing view 
that problems with attention are the principal aspect of the disorder. These dif¬ 
ficulties include failure to finish tasks, not listening, being easily distracted, and 
having problems concentrating and maintaining attention. This description fit 
Ken well. Overactivity and restlessness were reflected in his problems staying 
seated in school, fidgeting when seated, and being described as “always on the 
go.” Hyperactivity is especially evident in any situation that requires controlling 
an activity level, such as school and mealtimes. 

DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) lists three types of ADHD: (a) the primarily inattentive 
type in which poor attention predominates, (b) the predominately hyperactive type 
in which hyperactivity and impulsivity are primary, and (c) the combined type in 
which both hyperactivity and inattention are prominent. Overall, the combined type 
is most common, but among girls, the inattentive type is more frequent (Biederman, 
Mick, & Faraone, 2002). Ken’s formal diagnosis was ADHD, combined type, 
because he met the criteria for both the inattention and hyperactivity components. 

In addition to their core problems, children with ADHD have a number of 
other difficulties. They often have deficits in cognitive processing speed and 
poor handwriting and visual-motor coordination, markers of mild neurologi¬ 
cal impairments (Mayes & Calhoun, 2007). Children with ADHD also have 
difficulties getting along with peers and making friends (Hinshaw & Melnick, 
1995). They are more likely to be injured in accidental falls, to be hit by a car, 




Chapter 22 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 331 


or to accidentally ingest poison because their symptoms make them more likely 
to take risks and ignore safety precautions (Daley, 2006). Up to half experience 
problems with sleep, typically trouble falling and staying asleep, resisting bed¬ 
time, and problems waking up in the morning (Weiss & Salpekar, 2010). 

As many as 50% also meet the diagnostic criteria for conduct disorder, 
behavior that violates the rights of others and basic social norms, for example, 
being aggressive toward people, lying, stealing, and damaging property (Flory & 
Lynam, 2003). Many of them also have comorbid oppositional-defiant disorder 
and learning disabilities. Distinguishing between conduct disorder and ADHD 
can be difficult because of the overlap of the symptoms of each disorder. In con¬ 
duct disorder, however, it is thought that the antisocial behavior does not arise 
from attention deficits or impulsiveness. Therefore, although Ken showed some 
features of conduct disorder, he was diagnosed with ADHD because his antisocial 
behavior seemed due to impulsivity. People who have both ADHD and conduct 
disorder appear to be at particularly high risk for substance abuse in adulthood. 

Between 3 and 7% of elementary school children have ADHD (APA, 
2000), with two to three times as many boys meeting the diagnostic criteria as 
girls (Willoughby, 2003). It is much more common in boys than girls in samples 
seeking treatment, but the gender difference in prevalence appears to be much 
smaller in community samples (McGee & Feehan, 1991). 

The first symptoms typically appear early in toddlerhood, and most chil¬ 
dren with the hyperactive or combined subtypes are considered to be having 
serious problems by the time they are 7 years old (Voeller, 2004). If diagnos¬ 
tic criteria are carefully followed, ADHD can be reliably diagnosed in children 
of preschool age, but most preschoolers who meet these criteria are not identi¬ 
fied and brought into treatment (Egger, Kondo, & Angold, 2006). Recently, the 
trend has been to diagnose adolescents and adults with ADHD, even when they 
had not been identified as having ADHD as children. However, a recent review 
of the research concluded that ADHD symptoms generally improve with age 
(Willoughby, 2003), and people with ADHD are typically identified when they 
are in elementary school because their problems are already evident, so clini¬ 
cians should be careful not to overdiagnose ADHD among adults. In both males 
and females, the number of ADHD cases declines with age (Monuteaux, Mick, 
Faraone, & Biederman, 2010). Although symptoms do seem to improve with 
age, childhood ADHD constitutes a risk for poor educational, occupational, and 
psychosocial outcomes. People with ADHD are more likely to be incarcerated, 
be unemployed or work in lower status jobs, take risks and have accidents, and 
experience relationship difficulties (Steinhausen, 2009). 

Etiological Considerations 

Research indicates a strong genetic component in ADHD. Heritability estimates 
for ADHD are between 60 and 90% (Kent, 2004). Biederman, Faraone, Mick, 
& Warburton, (1995) have found that when parents have ADHD, 50% of their 



332 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


children also have ADHD. Similarly, Goodman and Stevenson (1989) found 
concordance for clinically diagnosed hyperactivity in 51% of monozygotic twins 
(MZ) and 33% of dizygotic (DZ) twins. Adoption studies further support the 
importance of a genetic predisposition to ADHD (van den Oord, Boomsma, & 
Verhulst, 1994). Although genetic factors are clearly central, hundreds of studies 
have been unable to identify the specific loci of the genes involved, so ADHD 
is probably caused by multiple genes, genes interacting, or gene-environment 
interactions (Banaschewski, Becker, Scherag, Franke, & Coghill, 2010). Reports 
from Ken’s father mentioned earlier indicate that he may have had ADHD as a 
child, so genetic inheritance is consistent for this case. 

What do children with ADHD inherit? Research into brain structures has 
been guided by the idea that ADHD reflects impulsivity; children with the dis¬ 
order are unable to inhibit activity when the environment calls for it and cannot 
inhibit attention from distracting stimuli (Quay, 1997). Evidence has accumu¬ 
lated that there may be some impairment in the frontal lobes of the brain, which 
are known to play an important role in allowing people to inhibit behavioral 
responses. For example, Castellanos et al. (1996) examined the magnetic reso¬ 
nance imaging (MRI) scans of children with ADHD and found that they had 
smaller frontal lobes than controls. Evidence of their poorer performance on 
neuropsychological tests of frontal lobe functioning (such as inhibiting behav¬ 
ioral responses) provides further support for the theory that a basic deficit in 
this part of the brain may be related to the symptoms of the disorder (Nigg, 
2001). Some argue that children with ADHD have an aversion to waiting 
and that this accounts for their impulsive behavior (Taylor, 2009). Moreover, 
the lower academic achievement usually seen among children with ADHD is 
substantially due to genetic factors, independent of intelligence (Saudino & 
Plomin, 2007), rather than one proposed explanation that ADHD arises from 
frustration children have with their problems learning, or another, that hyper¬ 
activity makes it harder for children to learn in the classroom. It seems that to 
a large degree, children who have inherited ADHD have also inherited poor 
academic achievement. 

Other biological risk factors that may be linked to ADHD include low 
birth weight and birth complications (Ben Amor et al., 2005). Maternal smok¬ 
ing during pregnancy may also be important. Millberger, Biederman, Faraone, 
Chen, and Jones (1996) found that 22% of the children of mothers who smoked 
a pack or more of cigarettes a day could be diagnosed with ADHD as compared 
to only 8% in a control sample. Animal research has shown that nicotine inter¬ 
feres with brain development during gestation. Exposure to lead, even at very 
low levels that are common in the United States, is associated with more symp¬ 
toms of ADHD (Nigg, Nikolas, Knottnerus, Cavanagh, & Friderici, 2010). Brain 
injury due to trauma, stroke, or encephalitis can sometimes lead to symptoms of 
ADHD (Voeller, 2004). Environmental factors such as maternal alcohol use dur¬ 
ing pregnancy or family adversity might interact with genetic predispositions to 
cause ADHD (Steinhausen, 2009). 



Chapter 22 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 333 


A mother’s emotional state during her pregnancy also may affect her child’s 
risk for behavior problems. High levels of anxiety during early pregnancy 
may affect the developing brain through stress hormones. Van den Bergh and 
Marcoen (2004) found that maternal levels of anxiety early in pregnancy pre¬ 
dicted ADHD symptoms in children when they were 8 and 9 years old. The 
anxiety levels during early pregnancy were more predictive than those after the 
birth, which is consistent with the pregnancy hormonal environment program¬ 
ming brain development. 

Other environmental causes have been investigated as well. In a rigor¬ 
ously controlled study published in a mainstream medical journal, artificial food 
coloring and sodium benzoate, a widely used food preservative, were found 
to increase hyperactive behavior among 3-year-olds and 8- and 9-year-olds 
(McCann et ah, 2007). This study replicated previous similar findings and sug¬ 
gests that both children with and without ADHD respond to these chemicals in 
similar ways. 

Watching a lot of television at 1 and 3 years of age has also been linked 
to later attention problems (Christakis, Zimmerman, DiGiuseppe, & McCarty, 
2004). Television’s fast-paced events and quickly changing images may affect 
the developing brain, shortening attention span. This link between television 
exposure and attention problems is found for television shows with entertain¬ 
ment content but not for shows with educational content, such as Sesame Street, 
Blues Clues, or Dora the Explorer, probably because they are more slowly 
paced. The link with attention problems is especially strong for entertainment 
shows with violent content, such as Power Rangers, and moderately strong 
for those with nonviolent content, such as Rugrats (Zimmerman & Christakis, 
2007). To test whether the relationship between television exposure and attention 
problems is causal, Landhuis, Poulton, Welch, and Hancox (2007) conducted a 
longitudinal study in a population sample where they followed children from 5 
years of age into adolescence until 15 years of age. They found that childhood 
television exposure, at 2 hours but especially over 3 hours per day, predicted 
adolescent attention problems. This link remained even after controlling for 
child attention problems, child cognitive ability, socioeconomic status, gender, 
and adolescent television exposure. This study strengthens the argument that tel¬ 
evision exposure causes attention problems, although it is possible that another 
yet uncontrolled variable is responsible for the relationship. 

Being raised in chaotic or impoverished environments may lead to difficul¬ 
ties regulating attention and controlling impulses (Voeller, 2004). The quality of 
the parent-child relationship may also be important; maternal warmth was found 
to predict teachers’ ratings of ADHD symptoms in a sample of low birth-weight 
children who were at risk for behavioral problems (Tully, Arseneault, Caspi, 
Moffitt, & Morgan, 2004). The parent-child relationship, however, is bidirec¬ 
tional; the behavior of each is determined by the actions and reactions of the 
other. Whereas parents of children with ADHD give them more commands and 
have negative interactions with them, children with ADHD have also been found 



334 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


to be less compliant and more negative in their interactions with their parents 
(Barkley, Karlsson, & Pollard, 1985). As indicated later in the section on treat¬ 
ment, stimulant medication has been shown to reduce hyperactivity and increase 
compliance in ADHD children. Significantly, when such medication is used, the 
parent’s commands and negative behavior also decrease (see Barkley, 1990), 
suggesting that the child’s behavior influenced that of the parents. In Ken’s 
case, it seemed that his mother’s negative attitude toward him was principally a 
response to his disruptive behavior. Nevertheless, her negative attitude, coupled 
with the inconsistent disciplinary practices of the parents, may have exacerbated 
Ken’s disorder. 

Treatment 

The most common therapy for children with ADHD is stimulant medication 
such as methylphenidate (Ritalin) and amphetamine (Adderall). Many placebo- 
controlled studies have shown that these two medications are effective in reduc¬ 
ing symptoms of ADHD while they are being taken (Greydanus, Nazeer, & 
Patel, 2009). The drugs reduce aggression and hyperactivity and improve con¬ 
centration, classroom behavior, and social interactions. One ingenious study 
even demonstrated that Ritalin helped children with ADHD who were playing 
softball to assume the ready position in the outfield and keep track of the sta¬ 
tus of the game. Children given placebos, in contrast, frequently threw or kicked 
their gloves while the pitch was in progress (Pelham et al., 1990). Short-term 
side effects of stimulant treatment, principally insomnia and loss of appetite, 
usually disappear quickly. 

The benefits of the drugs are lost, however, if they are discontinued. 
Therefore, long-term treatment is indicated. Because all of the medications 
are associated with side effects, the decision to use them should be weighed 
carefully. Furthermore, although the drugs cause improvement, they do not 
lead to fully normal functioning. For example, Whalen et al. (1989) found sig¬ 
nificantly better peer appraisals during treatment, but the boys with ADHD 
were still liked less than average. The effect of drugs on academic performance 
also remains controversial, with some studies revealing positive changes and 
others none (Henker & Whalen, 1989). Finally, there have been concerns that 
stimulants are being overused and given to children who do not have ADHD. 
Prescriptions for stimulants have certainly increased in the past decade (Zito 
et al., 2000). Furthermore, in a study conducted in Virginia, 18 to 20% of fifth- 
grade boys were on stimulants, a figure much higher than the number expected 
given the prevalence of ADHD (LeFever, Dawson, & Morrow, 1999). Increasing 
numbers of preschool children have been prescribed stimulant medication, even 
though there is little data available for this age group (Kratochvil, Greenhill, 
March, Burke, & Vaughan, 2004). Some professionals have been concerned 
that using stimulant medication in childhood would increase the risk of sub¬ 
stance abuse in adulthood, but research has shown that it actually decreases the 



Chapter 22 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 335 


risk, possibly by reducing ADHD symptoms (Wilens, Faraone, Biederman, & 
Gunawardene, 2003). 

A variety of psychological therapies have been used for ADHD, but the 
most thoroughly studied is an operant learning or contingency management 
approach such as that used in Ken’s case. Positive reinforcement is used to 
increase on-task behavior such as remaining in one’s seat and engaging in posi¬ 
tive interactions with peers, teachers, and parents. Negative consequences follow 
undesirable behaviors such as being disruptive in the classroom. 

The comparative effectiveness of different treatments for ADHD has been 
evaluated in a large-scale, carefully conducted study (MTA Cooperative Group, 
1999). Children with ADHD were randomly assigned to one of four groups: (a) 
stimulant medication, (b) behavioral treatment, (c) medication plus behavioral 
treatment, and (d) standard community care. In terms of reducing symptoms and 
increasing positive functioning, the combined treatment was best but only slightly 
better than medication alone. However, children in the combined treatment group 
needed less medication, a potential advantage given the possible side effects of 
drugs. Results for the behavioral treatment were not as positive in this study as 
in prior research. On certain outcomes such as harsh and ineffective disciplines, 
combined medication and behavioral treatment was superior to medication alone 
(Chronis, Chacko, Fabiano, Wymbs, & Pelham, 2004). Behavioral treatment 
alone is recommended as the first treatment approach for preschool children, 
when the parents are reluctant to use medication, and for milder forms of ADHD 
(Root & Resnick, 2003). For preschoolers, parent training is the best form of non- 
pharmacological treatment, in which the therapist teaches the parents effective 
strategies to manage their child’s behavior (Young & Amarasinghe, 2010). 


Discussion Questions 


1. In what ways was Ken’s disorder linked to added stress on his family? Was 
this cause or effect? 

2. Research has linked watching a lot of television during the toddler years with 
later attention problems. How common is this practice? Has this increased or 
decreased in recent years? What advice do you have, given these findings, for 
parents of toddlers? 

3. Ken’s therapy did not involve medication. If you were his therapist, would 
you have recommended medication for him? Why do you think his therapist 
did not? 

4. Up to 20% of fifth-grade boys are taking psychostimulant medications, even 
though ADHD affects many fewer than one in five boys. What forces do you 
think this have led to this? What are the consequences? 




CHAPTER 23 


Oppositional Defiant Disorder 


As she stood outside her son’s bedroom door holding the handle shut, trying to 
keep him inside for his punishment, Nicole Helms fought back her tears. She 
felt like such a failure, and she had no idea what to do. Her 4-year-old son’s 
horrible temper tantrums scared her badly, and she felt both helpless and angry. 
Her mother-in-law, Mrs. Helms, would be home soon, and Nicole wanted her 
son, Tyler, to calm down before she arrived. He stopped screaming, kicking at 
the door, and pulling on the door knob, and she breathed a sigh of surprise and 
relief, hoping maybe he was going to stop. Then she heard a loud crashing noise 
that made her jump and fling open the door, fearing for Tyler’s safety. To her 
horror, she saw that he had climbed up on the bookshelf and ripped the curtains 
off the wall, knocking the bookshelf down in the process. She shouted at him, 
swatted his bottom, and then started to cry. He ran past her into the living room 
and flipped on the TV while she sat down on the floor in despair. At that point, 
she decided she had to get help, or her son would surely end up like his father. 
The next morning she called Tyler’s pediatrician, and his nurse arranged an 
appointment with a child clinical psychologist. Dr. Bell. 

Two weeks later, Nicole and Mrs. Helms brought Tyler for his appointment. 
Dr. Bell met them in the waiting room, calling Tyler’s name. She then kneeled 
down to his height level, smiled at him, and said hello. She introduced herself 
to Nicole and to Mrs. Helms, shaking their hands. She brought all three into her 
office, where she invited Tyler to play with the toys while she talked with his 
mother and grandmother to gather information about the presenting problem, 
symptoms, and family history. 

When he was younger, Tyler’s behavior seemed like that of other children 
his age, but in the past year or so, his first symptoms had appeared, and his 
behavior had become quite different from that of other children. He had become 
very mouthy and angry and said mean things to his mother and grandparents. He 
would call his mother fat and tell his grandparents he hated them. His mother 
and grandparents found themselves tiptoeing around him, hoping he would stay 
in a good mood, because when he was mad, nobody around him could be happy. 


336 



Chapter 23 Oppositional Defiant Disorder 337 


Tyler’s behavior was mostly unmanageable. Nicole could not control it, nor 
could her husband’s parents. They had tried spanking him, reasoning with him, 
pleading with him, and taking away his toys. They had even tried rewarding him 
with candy or ice cream if he stopped having a fit. When he didn't get his way, 
he would have a temper tantrum until he did. During his temper tantrums, his 
mother and grandmother had the impression that he was trying to get his way 
manipulatively, rather than really losing control of his emotions. He would start 
crying, screaming, fall to the ground, kick and hit the floor, and if that didn’t 
work, he would knock things off the coffee table or tip over a kitchen chair. He 
would also hit or kick an adult if they tried to stop him. When Nicole tried to 
spank him for misbehaving, he would laugh at her and say it didn’t hurt. Then 
she would hit him harder until she scared herself and stopped, clutching him 
close and begging his forgiveness. 

He wouldn’t go to bed when asked to and fell asleep most nights in front of 
the television. He wouldn’t clean up his toys and even argued about brushing his 
teeth. When his mother was talking on the telephone, even if it was something 
important, he would come over and start making clicking noises with his tongue at 
her over and over, louder and louder, to annoy her until she paid attention to him. 
Basically, if he got his way, he acted happy and could be very sweet, but he didn’t 
act happy that much anymore. Even when they took him somewhere fun, like 
Chuck E. Cheese, he wanted more game tokens than he was given or didn’t like 
his pizza. He would argue about which booth they chose to sit in or who should sit 
next to him. When he was arguing, his tone of voice was harsh and bossy. 

On occasions that she tried to discipline him, he would do something to 
get her back. Once when they were eating lunch at home, he said he wanted a 
cookie. Nicole told him he could have one when he finished half his sandwich. 
He looked at her defiantly, then picked up his glass of milk and slowly poured 
it all over his sandwich and the table. When closed in his room, he would throw 
his toys everywhere, pull the sheets off the bed, and empty all the clothing out 
of the drawers until she opened the door and relented. She had stopped trying to 
take him to church or the grocery store because it was so embarrassing when he 
acted that way. She dreaded what would happen when he started school next fall. 


Social and Family History 


Tyler was the only child of Billy and Nicole Helms. They were married the sum¬ 
mer after they graduated from high school, and a year and a half later, Tyler was 
bom. Tyler was the product of an uncomplicated, full-term pregnancy, and there 
were no problems during his birth. He met his early developmental milestones— 
such as crawling, walking, and talking—on time and had no health problems. He 
was affectionate, talkative, inquisitive, and curious as a toddler. He loved being 
read to and could sit for long periods of time listening to a book his mother read 




338 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


to him when he was only 2 years old. Nicole and Tyler developed a close, warm 
relationship. 

Nicole was a full-time homemaker, and Billy worked as a welder. They 
lived in their own apartment in the same part of town as Billy’s parents. Nicole’s 
parents were divorced, and her father lived in another state. She hadn’t seen him 
since she was 8 years old. Nicole’s mother did not have a very close relation¬ 
ship with Nicole, and they frequently argued over Nicole marrying Billy, over 
Nicole’s disapproval of her mother’s boyfriend, and over how she was raising 
Tyler. Nicole had pretty much stopped spending time with her. Billy was very 
close with his parents, though, and they got along well with Nicole, Nicole 
spent a lot of time with his mother when Billy and Mr. Helms, his father, were at 
work, and Mrs. Helms would often babysit for Tyler. 

Nicole and Billy’s relationship was mostly loving and positive, but Billy 
had episodes of “moodiness,” which was probably clinically significant depres¬ 
sion. This “moody streak” seemed to run in his father’s family, striking the men: 
His father also had bouts of depression from time to time. Neither Billy nor his 
father had been treated for their depression. Members of Billy’s family worried 
about all their male children being affected with this affliction, and Mrs. Helms 
was constantly watching Tyler as a young toddler for early signs that he was 
going to inherit the moody streak, too. 

Billy had begun smoking marijuana when he was in middle school. He used 
it fairly regularly throughout high school and occasionally after he and Nicole 
married. Nicole occasionally smoked it with him when she was in high school, 
but after they married, she stopped using it. They sometimes drank alcohol, but 
Billy drank more than Nicole. After she got pregnant, Nicole didn’t like Billy 
using drugs and pressured him to keep marijuana out of their home. He mostly 
complied. He would hang out with his friends and sometimes get high, but he 
didn’t bring it into their apartment anymore. He was an involved father and was 
close to Tyler, who was his pride and joy. He loved “play wrestling” with his 
son, and Tyler loved watching him play video games. He would give Tyler a set 
of controls and let him pretend he was playing, too. Tyler seemed to worship his 
father and followed him around, imitating him. 

Just after Tyler turned 3 years old, Billy began sinking into one of his 
depressions. He spent less and less time with the family and more time away, 
with friends or off by himself. He started smelling like marijuana smoke all the 
time again. Nicole was worried but didn’t know what she could do beyond beg¬ 
ging him to stop smoking. After 2 months of this behavior, one day he took off. 
While Nicole and Tyler were at Walmart, he packed up all of his clothes, his 
video games, and music and left in his pickup truck. He didn’t write a note of 
explanation, didn't say goodbye, and didn't say anything to his friends, parents, 
or coworkers. Nicole and his parents had not heard anything from him since 
then. For the first several weeks, Nicole was sure he would come back. When 
their minimal savings ran out, she and Tyler had to move in with Billy’s par¬ 
ents and let their apartment go. Mr. and Mrs. Helms were very loyal to Nicole 



Chapter 23 Oppositional Defiant Disorder 339 


and ashamed that their son had deserted his family. They were determined to 
take care of her and Tyler. Mrs. Helms, however, harbored secret fears that 
this abandonment of Tyler by Billy cemented Tyler’s fate of having the moody 
streak, too. 


Conceptualization and Treatment 


While gathering this background information. Dr. Bell kept a close eye on 
Tyler’s behavior. He played quietly with the toys and seemed a little shy at first. 
He was listening carefully to every word that was said but didn't participate in 
the conversation. He readily went to the waiting room with his grandmother 
when asked so that his mother could speak privately with Dr. Bell about sensi¬ 
tive information. As the session went on, however, he would occasionally leave 
the toys and stand by his mother while she talked, touching her hair and laugh¬ 
ingly, almost embarrassedly, denying her claims. When his grandmother would 
chime in, agreeing with and supporting Nicole’s reports, Tyler would go back to 
playing. If asked a direct question, such as what his favorite foods were, or what 
television shows he liked, he readily responded. His play was age appropriate, 
and there was no evidence of any problems sustaining attention. In fact, Tyler 
seemed more mature than many 4-year-olds in his ability to follow the conversa¬ 
tion. There was clearly warmth and affection between Tyler and his mother dur¬ 
ing their interactions in this first session. In addition, Mrs. Helms appeared to be 
very supportive of Nicole. The problems began to be evident, however, when it 
was time to leave, and Tyler began to misbehave. He wanted to take one of the 
toys home. As his mother and grandmother began to set limits on his behavior, 
he became more defiant until he hurled the toy angrily down and stomped away. 

Dr. Bell recommended that Nicole and Tyler come alone to the next session 
so Nicole could learn the tools she would need to discipline Tyler successfully 
and to set appropriate and effective limits on his behavior. Tyler’s oppositional 
defiant disorder was seen as emerging out of his difficult emotions stemming 
from the loss of his father. These emotions, combined with his mother’s lack of 
self-confidence after her own loss of her husband (made particularly difficult for 
her in light of her own lost relationship with her father) undermined her con¬ 
sistency and sense of certainty in disciplining Tyler. It is also often harder for 
single parents to maintain discipline because they don’t have their spouse’s help. 
From a family systems perspective, Nicole was now almost in a child role in 
relation to Mrs. Helms, and although Mrs. Helms did not actively undermine 
her, this child role further weakened her authority with Tyler. Finally, all three 
adults remaining in Tyler’s life were afraid that if they disciplined him too 
severely, it would scar him for life by making him moody and depressed. The 
intervention, therefore, was to consist of hist teaching Nicole how to manage 
Tyler’s behavior, then elevating her status in the family system to being clearly 
an adult/authority figure, and next reassuring everyone that Tyler actually needed 




340 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


discipline as much as he needed love. Finally, Tyler would be seen individually 
in play therapy to address his feelings of loss relating to his father’s departure. 

Time-Out Procedure 

At the next session, Nicole and Tyler were seen together. Again, Tyler was 
allowed to play with the toys in the room while Dr. Bell talked with his mother. 
Dr. Bell educated Nicole about the importance of clear, realistic expectations 
about children’s behavior and consistent, predictable, and effective discipline. 
Again, Tyler listened carefully. After a short time, he interrupted the conversa¬ 
tion. Nicole gently reminded him to wait until she finished what she was saying. 
Tyler started poking her and intentionally getting in the way of her line of vision 
with Dr. Bell. Nicole looked helplessly at Dr. Bell, who asked her if this behav¬ 
ior was acceptable to her. After Nicole said it was not. Dr. Bell encouraged her 
to communicate this message calmly, clearly, and directly to Tyler, along with 
a request of what she expected him to do. When she did so, he hit his mother 
in the arm. Again, Dr. Bell supported her in setting appropriate limits. With the 
psychologist’s support, Nicole told Tyler to sit in a “time-out” chair until he was 
ready to behave. She gently guided him to a chair where he sat for a moment, 
before getting up and misbehaving again. Next, Dr. Bell helped Nicole explain 
that since he would not sit there himself, his mother would have to hold Tyler 
in the chair until he was ready to behave. When Nicole held him in her lap in 
the time-out chair, however, Tyler began kicking and hitting his mother angrily. 
Again, Dr. Bell supported Nicole’s efforts to limit his behavior. Nicole explained 
to Tyler that because one of the basic rules of their family is that no one can 
be hurt, she would hold him in such a way that he could not hurt her. Dr. Bell 
taught her a restraint hold that would let her control his behavior in a nonviolent 
manner, while keeping Tyler safe and not letting him hurt her. 

Tyler reacted as Dr. Bell expected to the hold, but his reaction was 
extremely upsetting for Nicole. He initially laughed challengingly, but soon his 
laughter and mocking gave way to worry when his mother did not relent. His 
physical challenges to the hold increased: He fought and twisted, trying to head¬ 
butt his mother, then to kick her. He started crying and sobbing, begging to be 
let go. Dr. Bell encouraged Nicole through each step of this ordeal. She was told 
to remind Tyler that when he was calm and quiet and ready to behave, he could 
get out, but that he was not allowed to hurt people. Tyler continued fighting 
and began screaming and crying, saying he had to go to the bathroom, that he 
was thirsty. He tried to spit at his mother. Again, she calmly (although through 
her own tears) reminded him that when he was calm and ready to behave, he 
could go. After about 50 minutes of fighting, Tyler finally calmed down and gave 
up. Before releasing him, Nicole checked again with him to get his agreement 
that he was ready to behave, and he nodded through his sniffles. When she let 
him go, he immediately curled up in her lap, subdued and exhausted but behav¬ 
ing appropriately. 



Chapter 23 Oppositional Defiant Disorder 341 


At this point. Dr. Bell praised Tyler for his good behavior and effusively 
praised Nicole for her courage facing the difficult episode and her determination 
to take good care of her son. She was encouraged to repeat the same procedure 
at home any time he was defiant, disobedient, or argumentative and to begin 
with the least-restrictive time-out (a time-out chair by himself) and to move up 
to physical restraint only if necessary. She was encouraged not to avoid time-out 
but to seek out the very next opportunity to use it. Another session was sched¬ 
uled for a few days later. 

At the next session, Nicole was happy and excited, and Tyler was quiet and 
subdued. After the last session, Tyler seemed exhausted and had not misbehaved 
again that evening. He had even gone to bed when she asked him to. But late 
the next morning she had to hold him in time-out again for about an hour before 
he relented. A second time, she had had to hold him in time-out for 20 minutes. 
After that, when he misbehaved, he would sit in the chair by himself with her 
watching him. The next few sessions involved strengthening the time-out proce¬ 
dure and helping Nicole understand when and how to use it. Dr. Bell also taught 
Nicole to positively reinforce Tyler by praising him when he behaved appropri¬ 
ately or did what she asked. 

Family Sessions 

Mrs. Helms joined Nicole and Tyler in the next few sessions. Mr. Helms was 
also invited, but he did not feel his work schedule allowed it. During these fam¬ 
ily sessions, a parental alliance was strengthened between Nicole and Mrs. 
Helms, and clear boundaries were drawn with Tyler to elevate Nicole clearly to 
a parental level with Mrs. Helms, while keeping Tyler clearly at the child level. 
During these sessions. Dr. Bell taught more parent management strategies to 
help Nicole and Mrs. Helms have age-appropriate and reasonable expectations 
for Tyler’s behavior. During this time, Tyler’s behavior was “transformed.” 
Nicole and Mrs. Helms were both happy about Tyler’s gains and had been able 
to follow through very successfully with consistent use of time out. During these 
sessions, the issues of loss and missing Billy were discussed. After Mrs. Helms 
expressed her fears that her husband's and Billy’s “moody genes” would be 
passed on, Dr. Bell reassured her. 

Individual Play Therapy 

After the goals of parent management training had been met. Dr. Bell began 
to meet individually with Tyler in play therapy. Play therapy is used with pre¬ 
school children because they often use symbolic play to manage their feelings 
and practice new skills. Children that age have difficulty verbalizing their feel¬ 
ings directly. Initially, Tyler was aloof and angry when he entered the playroom 
and resisted symbolic play. Dr. Bell said she understood how mad he must be 
at her for helping his mom change the rules of their family. During the first few 



342 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


sessions, he used large colored blocks to make sidewalks for him and Dr. Bell 
to walk on. Dr. Bell remained accepting, following his every lead, and after a 
few sessions, he warmed up and began engaging more readily in symbolic play. 
Dr. Bell looked for ways to comment on the feelings the themes of his play 
reflected. For example, Tyler’s play repeated over and over again the theme of 
a “Daddy” figurine getting on the toy plane and flying away from the “child” 
figurine. Dr. Bell empathized with how sad the child must be that his daddy is 
going away and how much he must miss him. She then added that the child must 
also feel angry at his father for leaving. Tyler nodded at these interpretations. Dr. 
Bell added that Tyler must miss his father, too. Tyler initially did not respond 
directly to such comments, but after several sessions, a new theme emerged in 
his play. He chose to play with a toy mailbox, scribbling on a piece of paper then 
putting it in the mailbox. He said he was sending a letter to his father. Dr. Bell 
again focused on the feelings behind these actions, saying to Tyler how much he 
wished he could write his father a letter and get one back, and how sad it was 
that this could not happen. After these themes began to recede from his play and 
his feelings seemed to have been fully processed. Dr. Bell and Nicole decided to 
end the therapy. By the last session, Nicole felt more confident about her ability 
to provide effective discipline. Her relationship with Tyler was more positive, 
and his behavior was much improved. 


Discussion 


According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM- 
IV-TR\ APA, 2000 pp. 99-102), Tyler met the criteria for oppositional defiant 
disorder (ODD), one of the disruptive behavior disorders (a section that also 
includes attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [see Chapter 22], and con¬ 
duct disorder), it is one of the “Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, 
Childhood, or Adolescence.” ODD is defined by a pattern of negativistic. hostile, 
and defiant behavior lasting at least 6 months, during which four (or more) of the 
following are present: 

1. Often loses temper 

2 . Often argues with adults 

3. Often actively defies or refuses to comply with adults' requests or rules 

4 . Often deliberately annoys people 

5. Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior 

6. Is often touchy or easily annoyed by others 

7. Is often angry and resentful 

8. Is often spiteful or vindictive 

The behavioral disturbance must cause significant impairment in the child’s 
functioning, and the child must not meet criteria for conduct disorder, which 
subsumes oppositional defiant disorder (i.e., all children with conduct disorder 




Chapter 23 Oppositional Defiant Disorder 343 


would meet criteria for ODD, but not vice versa). Importantly, developmental 
norms must be considered when determining if the criteria are met. In other 
words, the clinician must compare the child’s behavior against what is typical of 
children of the same age and developmental level, and the child’s behavior must 
be significantly more frequent or severe. 

Disruptive behavior is one of the most common reasons why children are 
brought in for psychological treatment (Nock, Kazdin, Hiripi, & Kessler, 2007), 
and many of them are diagnosed with ODD. The disorder typically emerges 
before age 8 and nearly always by early adolescence. Behavioral disturbance 
preceding the onset of the disorder, however, is often evident during the pre¬ 
school years. Because preschoolers are characteristically negativistic (during the 
“terrible twos” parents note that children’s favorite word is often “no”) as part 
of their developing sense of independence, symptoms should be very significant 
before assigning this diagnosis to preschool children. A substantial majority of 
children show aggression and temper tantrums as 2-year-olds, but preschoolers’ 
aggression is more likely to be normative if against other children and indica¬ 
tive of pathology if it targets adults; typical temper tantrums last a few minutes, 
but sustained and destructive temper tantrums are more characteristic of chil¬ 
dren with a behavior disorder (Wakschlag et al., 2007). The type of aggression is 
also important to consider; reactive aggression, which occurs when the child 
is frustrated, is fairly common among preschoolers, but proactive aggression, 
which has the goal of injuring another and may occur without direct provoca¬ 
tion, is quite rare, even among preschoolers, and more indicative of a clinically 
significant condition (Wakschlag, Tolan, & Leventhal, 2010). There is a balance 
to be made between the danger of overidentifying and pathologizing a child for 
behavior that may be temporary and missing a chance to intervene early before 
a condition worsens (Banaschewski, 2010). Tyler’s symptoms were not typical 
of usual preschool behavior because they included aggression against adults and 
destructive temper tantrums, such as knocking things off the coffee table. 

Since ODD was first formally introduced as a disorder in 1980, there has 
not been as much research on the disorder as on some of the other childhood 
disorders. In addition, because there is substantial comorbidity with conduct dis¬ 
order and because conduct disorder, if it emerges, replaces ODD as a diagnosis, 
many longitudinal research studies collapse the two diagnoses into one category. 
Researchers are still working toward definitively establishing its prevalence rates. 
About 2% of boys and 1.5% of girls met the criteria for ODD in one community 
sample (Rowe, Maughan, Pickles, Costello, & Angold, 2002). Other studies have 
found higher prevalence rates. In one large study of a national sample, adults 
reported on their history of a number of different psychological disorders, and 
the lifetime prevalence rate of ODD in that sample was 10% (Nock et al., 2007). 
In a study that examined a large community sample of 4-year-old preschoolers, 
8.3% were found to have moderate to severe ODD (Lavigne, LeBailly, Hopkins, 
Gouze, & Binns, 2009). Children living in families with lower incomes are much 
more likely to have the disorder (Steiner & Remsing, 2007). 



344 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


The course of ODD is complicated. Children who are identified by moth¬ 
ers and preschool teachers as having high levels of disruptive behavior at age 
3 are likely to persist in having behavioral problems into adolescence (Pierce, 
Ewing, & Campbell, 1999). Others who display problems in only one context 
or whose problems are less severe may grow out of the disruptive behavior. As 
children with ODD mature into adolescents, some of them begin to meet the 
criteria for conduct disorder; in these children, the level of oppositionality and 
defiance does not diminish, but more serious lawbreaking or delinquent behav¬ 
ior is added (Maughan, Rowe, Messer, Goodman, & Meltzer, 2004). One of the 
best predictors of which children will go on to develop conduct disorder is the 
symptom of being hurtful, spiteful, or vindictive to others; children with ODD 
who show this symptom are most likely to develop more serious pathology in 
adolescence (Kolko & Pardini, 2010). Studies using clinical samples have found 
that the majority of children with ODD develop conduct disorder as teens, but 
clinical samples are not typical of all individuals with the disorder, and different 
findings emerge when community samples are used. In one representative com¬ 
munity sample, ODD was a risk factor for conduct disorder for boys but not for 
girls. Almost half the boys who had ODD at age 9 went on to develop conduct 
disorder as adolescents. Girls with ODD as children were only at risk for contin¬ 
uing to have the disorder as adolescents (Rowe et ah, 2002). So although many 
do, the majority of children with ODD do not go on to develop conduct disorder. 

In clinical samples, more boys than girls are in treatment for ODD. In com¬ 
munity samples, boys are somewhat more likely than girls to meet the diagnostic 
criteria (Maughan et al., 2004). However, mothers report more similar rates of 
symptoms for girls and boys than do teachers, so perhaps boys’ behavior prob¬ 
lems are more evident in public settings. In a large household survey, it was 
found that parents’ reports of the numbers of oppositional behaviors did not dif¬ 
fer between boys and girls (Lahey et ah, 2000). More research is needed on girls 
with ODD. Tyler had not yet started school, but without treatment, it is probable 
that his symptoms would have been readily evident to his kindergarten teacher. 

As noted in Chapter 22, ODD has a high rate of comorbidity with atten¬ 
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD); about one-quarter of people who 
reported having ODD also had a history of ADHD (Nock et ah, 2007). ODD is 
also comorbid with depression and anxiety. ODD is typically the first disorder 
that emerges; the other disorders develop later in life. Although Tyler did not 
have any problems with impulsiveness, hyperactivity, or inattentiveness, his dis¬ 
order might have put him at risk later in life for conduct disorder, anxiety, and 
depression if it had gone untreated. 

Etiological Considerations 

Much of the research on the causes of ODD has looked more broadly at dis¬ 
ruptive behavior disorders, considering ODD in the same category as conduct 
disorder. Recently, however, separate investigations have examined ODD. Most 



Chapter 23 Oppositional Defiant Disorder 345 


researchers have concluded that there are multiple factors that add together in 
causing the disorder (Steiner & Remsing, 2007). One of those causal factors 
is genetic. In a population-based twin study of children and adolescents from 
Virginia, both monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs’ symptoms 
of ODD were found to be correlated, with a stronger correlation for MZ twin 
pairs. This indicates that both genetic and environmental factors are involved in 
its etiology (Eaves et al., 1997). These data also suggested that a common envi¬ 
ronmental causal factor was linked to both ODD and conduct disorder. Further 
analysis also found a genetic factor that was common to both disorders (Eaves 
et al., 2000). In another population-based twin study of children and adolescents 
in Minnesota, these findings were replicated, strengthening confidence in the 
finding that both genetic and environmental factors cause ODD (Burt, Krueger, 
McGue, & Iacono, 2001). The Minnesota study found evidence for one strongly 
predictive environmental factor that is common to ODD, conduct disorder, and 
ADHD, as well as separate genetic factors that are linked to each disorder. 
Further research is needed to specify exactly which genes are involved and what 
environmental experiences are critical in the etiology of ODD. 

Personality traits or temperament may also be important. One line of 
research examines personality traits characteristic of adult antisocial personality 
disorder to see if these traits are also evident in children with ODD. The devel¬ 
opmental pathway that occurs for a subset of children—ODD in childhood and 
then conduct disorder in adolescence—sometimes continues into antisocial per¬ 
sonality disorder in adulthood. In one study that suggested a connection between 
ODD and later antisocial personality disorder, children with both ODD and 
ADHD who scored high on the personality traits of callousness (lack of empa¬ 
thy) and unemotionality (shallow or limited emotions) were also likely to show 
fearlessness and a lack of concern about their own behavior problems (Barry et 
al., 2000). They also continued to play a game for a long time after the results 
switched from winning (rewarding) to losing (punishing). These traits are part 
of psychopathy. Callousness and unemotionality were the key factors in deter¬ 
mining which children had this constellation of traits. Tyler did not have ADHD 
or display callousness or unemotionality and did not act fearlessly or engage in 
sensation-seeking, reckless behaviors. Nobody in his family displayed person¬ 
ality traits of psychopathy (including his father by the report of other family 
members). Because he did not have these traits, he may have been less likely to 
develop antisocial personality disorder. 

Autonomic underarousal in response to reward, which has also been linked 
to antisocial behavior in adults and conduct disorder in children, has been stud¬ 
ied in children with ODD. Autonomic underarousal is measured by heart rate 
and changes in electrical conductivity in the skin during certain situations. 
Preschool children with comorbid ODD and ADHD show this underarousal in 
response to reward (Crowell et al., 2006). Although this response is related to 
biological factors such as serotonin and noradrenaline systems, interestingly, 
it can also be affected by environmental experiences such as attending special 



346 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


preschools that feature teachers trained in behavior management and counseling 
for parents. 

In another study, school-age boys with ODD who showed autonomic 
underarousal also showed less physiological reaction to a punishment (meas¬ 
ured as losing points in a game). In addition, they kept using their losing strat¬ 
egy in the game even though the strategy was repeatedly punished (Matthys, van 
Goozen, Snoek, & van Engeland, 2004). This evidence shows that at least some 
children with ODD relate to rewarding and punishing experiences the same way 
people with antisocial personality disorder do. 

Environmental causal factors, both biological and social, have also been 
studied. Toxins have been linked to oppositional behavior. Children whose moth¬ 
ers smoke cigarettes during their pregnancies are at increased risk for ODD. 
Exposure to prenatal smoking doubled the risk of the child later having ODD 
compared to children whose mothers never smoked, even when controlling for 
low birth weight, mothers’ educational level, and mothers’ antisocial behav¬ 
ior (Nigg & Breslau, 2007). The pathway of this effect could be that cigarette 
exposure causes a child to have an irritable temperament (a link confirmed by 
research studies), and irritability might in turn increase the chance of develop¬ 
ing oppositional behavior. Although this causal pathway may contribute to some 
cases of ODD, it does not relate to Tyler. His mother did not smoke cigarettes, 
and he did not have an irritable temperament; his mother reported that his behav¬ 
ior was easy to manage when he was younger. 

The main focus of research on the environmental factors that cause ODD 
has been on parenting. Many different aspects of the parent-child relationship 
have been explored, but the best researched one is the way that parents use dis¬ 
cipline. Parents of children with disruptive behavior often use inconsistent 
discipline. They may threaten the child with punishment if they don't comply 
but then do not follow through with punishing the child. Or their reactions to the 
child’s behavior may be unpredictable, varying from day to day. They may also 
positively reinforce the child’s arguing by giving in to their demands (Steiner & 
Remsing, 2007). These difficult interactions may develop into a coercive cycle, 
described by Gerald Patterson (1982). In a coercive cycle (often seen at grocery 
store checkout lanes), a child engages in an escalation of unpleasant behavior 
when the parent attempts to set limits (begging, whining, and nagging the parent 
to buy them candy after the parent first said “no”) and negatively reinforces the 
parent’s giving in to their demands (when the parent finally relents and buys 
the candy, the child immediately stops the unpleasant behavior, therefore neg¬ 
atively reinforcing the parent’s conceding). At the same time, the parent inad¬ 
vertently positively reinforces the child’s unpleasant, argumentative behavior by 
buying them candy after they nag, making the nagging more likely to reoccur. 
This cycle becomes very stable and resistant to extinction. Tyler and his mother 
interacted with each other in a coercive cycle. For example, Nicole positively 
reinforced his disobedient, destructive behavior when he pulled the curtains in 
his room down by opening the door and giving up her discipline so that he was 



Chapter 23 Oppositional Defiant Disorder 347 


able to go and watch television, and Tyler negatively reinforced his mother giv¬ 
ing up on disciplining him by discontinuing his screaming, destructive behavior. 

In addition to inconsistent discipline, other types of dysfunctional disci¬ 
pline can lead to oppositionality or defiant behavior in children. The use of puni¬ 
tive discipline tactics such as yelling, nagging, and threatening and the use of 
physically aggressive tactics such as beating or hitting have been linked to the 
development of disruptive behavior problems (Stormshak, Bierman, McMahon, 
& Lengua, 2000). In addition to finding that children who experience inconsist¬ 
ent discipline have more oppositionality, Stormshak et al. found that those who 
experience punitive and aggressive discipline also have higher levels of opposi¬ 
tional behavior. Some psychologists include spanking as a form of aggressive 
discipline, conceptualizing it as similar to shaking, shoving, and beating up the 
child. Even though many parents advocate the use of spanking as a disciplinary 
technique, research has confirmed that it increases the child’s later aggression 
and behavior problems, at least among European American (white) families 
(Deater-Deckard, Dodge, Bates, & Pettit, 1996). 

Because of these negative consequences and because it models aggression 
as an appropriate way to solve problems, psychologists usually do not advocate 
spanking. For some defiant children, like Tyler, spanking can lead to a power 
struggle, where the child increases the challenging behavior, provoking the par¬ 
ent to increase the violence of the spanking, until there is a risk for physically 
abusing the child. This risk is also a danger when parents lose control of their 
anger while spanking. Among African American families, spanking does not 
appear to have the same deleterious effects; it may be that it is more accepted in 
black culture or has a different meaning in black families, such as being a sign 
of concern or involvement. But for Tyler and Nicole, who are white, spanking 
seemed to emerge when Nicole’s resources for discipline had all failed, and she 
fell back on spanking as a last resort. 

Sometimes parents do not use effective parenting techniques because they 
do not know or understand them. But at times, other complicating factors get 
in the way. Some children are more difficult to parent than others, and some¬ 
times there is a bad fit between the temperaments of the parent and child; these 
relationships in the family system are important (Greene & Doyle, 1999). 
Tyler’s emotional upheaval at the sudden and unexplained loss of his father 
was expressed as irritability and uncooperative behavior, making him dif¬ 
ficult to parent at that time. The adults that remained in his life also lost their 
confidence to use appropriate discipline because of their sense of the familial 
legacy of depression, especially in the light of this abandonment. They were 
afraid that discipline would hurt Tyler, so they became hesitant and inconsist¬ 
ent. Another complicating factor occurs when marital conflict interferes with the 
parents’ ability to implement effective discipline. Marital conflict undermines 
mothers’ ability to discipline effectively, which in turn increases the child’s 
oppositional behavior (Mann & MacKenzie, 1996). Marital dissatisfaction leads 
to fathers having less warm, accepting relationships with their children, which 



348 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


in turn increases the child's oppositional behavior. The parents of 3-year-old 
hyperactive children who also have oppositional behavior display more open 
and intense marital conflict than those whose children are not oppositional 
(Goldstein et al., 2007). Marital conflict may both increase children’s opposi- 
tionality and also be increased by it. 

In addition to finding high levels of marital conflict, especially overt marital 
hostility between the parents of boys with ODD, Lindahl (1998) found that these 
families were characterized by disengagement and disconnectedness between 
members and lax and inconsistent parenting. Children being brought for mental- 
health treatment who were diagnosed with ODD were more likely to have expe¬ 
rienced victimizing trauma (assault, mugging, family or neighborhood violence, 
molestation) than children without ODD (Ford et al., 1999). Both oppositional- 
ity and delinquent behavior in adolescence are linked with depression; physical 
aggression is not (Rowe, Maughan, & Eley, 2006). 

In addition to marital conflict and victimization, another form of adversity, 
living in poverty, is strongly linked to children’s disruptive behavior. One unique 
study has clarified the reasons for this phenomenon. Costello, Compton, Keeler, 
& Angold (2003) were in the process of following a representative population 
sample of 1,420 children in a longitudinal study when a casino opened on the 
American Indian reservation in North Carolina where some of the sample lived. 
This change had the effect of lifting some of the Indian children out of poverty 
because all the families on that reservation received income from the casino. 
Children who were persistently poor had a 59% greater chance of having any 
psychological diagnosis than those who had never lived in poverty. Children that 
moved out of poverty showed a 40% decrease in their symptoms of ODD and 
conduct disorder after their families received the additional income, making the 
levels of their symptoms almost the same as those children who had never lived 
in poverty. The researchers found that this effect occurred because of how much 
supervision the parents gave the children. When living in poverty, the parents 
provided much more lax supervision, and after they were lifted out of poverty, 
they provided better supervision. This study is so interesting methodologi¬ 
cally because it is a natural experiment (the families were “randomly” selected 
to receive more income), being lifted out of poverty could not be attributed to 
characteristics in their psychological functioning or genetics. This allows the 
researchers to conclude that the poverty was a causal factor linked to the chil¬ 
dren’s oppositionality, and not an effect of some third variable or a result of their 
pathology. It is interesting to consider that for Tyler, his oppositional behaviors 
emerged after his father left and his mother ran out of money and fell below the 
poverty line, forcing her to move in with her parents-in-law. 

Treatment 

The best established type of treatment for ODD is parent management training. 
There is substantial evidence that this treatment is very effective for reducing 



Chapter 23 Oppositional Defiant Disorder 349 


children’s disruptive behaviors and improving family functioning (Farmer, 
Compton, Burns, & Robertson, 2002). This intervention has many different forms 
but always focuses on training parents to improve their interactions with their 
children and respond successfully to problem behaviors. Parents learn to posi¬ 
tively reinforce desired behavior and stop reinforcing problem behaviors. They 
learn to set up systems of consequences for problem behaviors, such as loss of 
privileges or time-out, and increase the consistency of their parenting. The evi¬ 
dence shows that parent management training results in substantial improvements 
for children with disruptive behavior. This treatment is especially effective with 
children who have ODD as well as another comorbid condition or who have more 
severe dysfunction as the result of their disorder (Kazdin & Whitley, 2006b). 

Cognitive behavioral approaches are also effective in treating ODD (Farmer 
et al., 2002). One such treatment is collaborative problem solving, which focuses 
on improving the joint problem solving of parents and children (Greene et al., 
2004). This treatment showed similar effectiveness to parent management train¬ 
ing at the end of treatment, and children’s gains in symptom improvement con¬ 
tinued after treatment so that by follow-up, it was significantly more effective. 
Another treatment combines a set of cognitive behavioral strategies, named by 
the researchers “Dinosaur School,” with parent management training that is 
more effective than either treatment by itself (Webster-Stratton & Hammond, 
1997). Dinosaur School uses dinosaur puppets and fantasy play in conjunction 
with videotape modeling to teach children successful coping strategies for a 
wide variety of difficult situations they are likely to encounter. 

Family therapy approaches have also been shown to be effective in treating 
ODD (Farmer et al., 2002), and some of these were used with Tyler. Including his 
grandmother in the treatment, and specifically focusing on strengthening bound¬ 
aries between subsystems (the parent subsystem of his mother and grandmother, 
separated from the child subsystem of Tyler) was an example of this family thera¬ 
peutic approach. For adolescents, multisystemic therapy has been shown to be 
very effective, but research needs to establish its effectiveness for school-age 
children (Farmer et al., 2002). Multisystemic therapy involves targeting the entire 
family system and how it interfaces with the community—integrating social 
work, community support, and school support—and has often been used with ado¬ 
lescents with severe conduct disorder. 

Most children who are treated for ODD are school age or adolescents; Tyler 
was treated as a preschooler. Treating preschoolers may be a real advantage 
because their behavior is not as entrenched by habit and may be easier to change 
(Nixon, Sweeney, Erickson, & Touyz, 2003). Regardless of the type of therapy 
used, establishing a strong therapeutic alliance is essential. The alliance between 
the therapist and the parent is linked to how much the parent is able success¬ 
fully to change their parenting behaviors (Kazdin & Whitley, 2006a). Dr. Bell 
focused on developing a supportive, accepting relationship with Nicole, empa¬ 
thizing with her struggles and encouraging her progress. This support helped 
Nicole through the difficult changes required for therapeutic success. After these 



350 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology 


changes were established, she was able to focus on helping Tyler with his feel¬ 
ings of sadness and anger at his father for leaving. 

Medication is not typically used for ODD unless it is comorbid with ADHD, 
and then drugs for ADHD are often used. To control aggressive behavior, clini¬ 
cians sometimes use antidepressants or anticonvulsants that are typically used 
to treat bipolar disorder (Althoff, Rettew, & Hudziak, 2003). More recently, 
antipsychotics have been used to target aggression, but these medications have 
a number of side effects that may outweigh their benefits. Nonpharmacological 
interventions should be used first to see if medication can be avoided. 


Discussion Questions 


1. Some television shows featuring people helping families cope with their dis¬ 
ruptive children have become popular in the United States. Have you ever 
seen them? Is disruptive behavior in children on the rise? If so, what factors 
do you think are responsible? 

2. Researchers found that spanking causes increases in children’s aggression 
and oppositionality, at least in some families. How did the researchers estab¬ 
lish that spanking caused the aggression, and not that aggressive children 
caused their parents to spank them more? 

3. Were you surprised about the evidence that spanking has different effects in 
families of different ethnic/racial backgrounds? Do you think the evidence 
supports the conclusions? What implications does that have for the recom¬ 
mendations psychologists make when treating children? 

4 . How do positive and negative reinforcement work in a coercive cycle? Have 
you ever seen a parent and a child engaged in such an interaction? If so, iden¬ 
tify what was being positively and negatively reinforced, and how. 




REFERENCES 


Abouesh, A., & Clayton, A. (1999). Compulsive voyeurism and exhibitionism: A clinical response to 
paroxetine. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 28, 23-30. 

Abramowitz, J. S. (2010). Psychological treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder. In D. J. Stein, 
E. Hollander, & B. O. Rothbaum (Eds.), Textbook of anxiety disorders (2nd ed., pp. 339-354). 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 

Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Street, G. P, Kozak, J. M., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Effects of 
comorbid depression on response to treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behavior 
Therapy, 31, 517-528. 

Abramowitz, J. S., Taylor, S., & McKay, D. (2007). Psychological theories of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. In E. A. Storch, G. R. Geffken, & T. K. Murphy (Eds.), Handbook of child and ado¬ 
lescent obsessive-compulsive disorder (pp. 109-129). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbum. 

Abrams, R. (2002). Electroconvulsive therapy (4th ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Aguilera, A., Lopez, S. R., Breitborde, N. K., Kopelowicz, A., & Zarate, R. (2010). Expressed 
emotion and sociocultural moderation in the course of schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 119, 875-885. 

Akhtar, S. (1992). Broken structures: Severe personality disorders and their treatment. Northvale, 
NJ: Jason Aronson. 

Albert, U., & Brunatto, C. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults: Efficacy of combined 
and sequential treatments. Clinical Neuropsychiatry: Journal of Treatment Evaluation, 6, 
83-93. 

Allen, J. J. B., & Iacono, W. G. (2001). Assessing the validity of amnesia in dissociative identity dis¬ 
order. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7, 311-344. 

Allen, P, Laroi, F., McGuire, P. K., & Aleman, A. (2008). The hallucinating brain: A review of struc¬ 
tural and functional neuroimaging studies of hallucinations. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 32, 175-191. 

Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Walshaw, P. D., & Neeren, A. (2006). Cognitive vulnerability to uni¬ 
polar and bipolar mood disorders. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 25, 726-754. 

Althoff, R. R., Rettew, D. C., & Hudziak, J. J. (2003). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, oppo¬ 
sitional defiant disorder, and conduct disorder. Psychiatric Annals, 33, 245-252. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1952). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: 
First edition (DSM-I). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: 
Second edition (DSM-II). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: 
Third edition (DSM-III). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: 
Fourth edition (DSM-IV). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 


351 




352 References 


American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: 
Fourth edition, Text revision (DSM-IV-TR). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 

Andersen, A. E. (1997). Inpatient treatment of anorexia nervosa. In D. M. Garner & P. E. Garfinkel 
(Eds.), Handbook of treatment for eating disorders (2nd ed., pp. 327-353). New York, NY: 
Guilford. 

Anderson, D. A., & Maloney, K. C. (2001). The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy on the core 
symptoms of bulimia nervosa. Clinical Psychology Review, 21, 971-988. 

Andreasen, N. C., Arndt, S., Alliger, R., Miller, D., & Flaum, M. (1995). Symptoms of schizophre¬ 
nia: Methods, meanings, and mechanisms. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 341-351. 

Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R., & Rose, S. (2003). Gender, social support, and PTSD in victims of vio¬ 
lent crime. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16, 421-427. 

Arikawa, H., Templer, D. I, Brown, R., Cannon, W. G., & Thomas-Dodson, S. (1999). The structure 
and correlates of kanashibari. The Journal of Psychology, 133, 369-375. 

Austin, S. B. (2001). Population-based prevention of eating disorders: An application of the Rose 
prevention model. Preventive Medicine, 32, 268-283. 

Auyeung, B., Baron-Cohen, S., Ashwin, E., Knickmeyer, R., Taylor, K., & Hackett, G. (2009). Fetal 
testosterone and autistic traits. British Journal of Psychology , 100, 122. 

Bach, A. K., Wincze, J. P, & Barlow, D. H. (2001). Sexual dysfunction. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), 
Clinical handbook of psychological disorders: A step-by-step treatment manual (3rd ed., 
pp. 562-608). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Baer, J. S., Sampson, P. D., Barr, H. M., Connor, P. D., & Streissguth, A. P. (2003). A 21-year longi¬ 
tudinal analysis of the effects of prenatal alcohol exposure on young adult drinking. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 60, 377-385. 

Baethge, C. (2003). Long-term treatment of schizoaffective disorder: Review and recommendations. 
Pharmacopsychiatry, 36, 45-56. 

Baker, B., Szalai, J. P., Paquette, M., & Tobe, S. (2003). Marital support, spousal contact, and the 
course of mild hypertension. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 55, 229-233. 

Baker, J. H., Mazzeo, S. E., & Kendler, K. S. (2007). Association between broadly defined bulimia 
nervosa and drug use disorders: Common genetic and environmental influences. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 40, 673-678. 

Banaschewski, T. (2010). Preschool behaviour problems-overpathologised or under-identified? 
A developmental psychopathology perspective is needed. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 51, 1-2. 

Banaschewski, T., Becker, K., Scherag, S., Franke, B., & Coghill, D. (2010). Molecular genetics 
of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: An overview. European Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 19, 231-251. 

Bandelow, B., Krause, J., Wedekind, D., Broocks, A., Hajak, G., & Riither, E. (2005). Early trau¬ 
matic life events, parental attitudes, family history, and birth risk factors in patients with bor¬ 
derline personality disorder and healthy controls. Psychiatry Research, 134, 169-179. 

Baranek, G. T., Boyd, B. A., Poe, M. D., David, F. J., & Watson, L. R. (2007). Hyperresponsive 
sensory patterns in young children with autism, developmental delay, and typical development. 
American Journal on Mental Retardation, 112, 233-245. 

Barbaresi, W. J., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L., & Katusic, S. K. (2009). The incidence of clini¬ 
cally diagnosed versus research-identified autism in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1976-1997: 
Results from a retrospective, population-based study. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 39, 464-470. 

Barbaresi, W. J., Katusic, S. K., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L., & Jacobsen, S. J. (2005). The inci¬ 
dence of autism in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1976-1997: Results from a population-based 
study. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 159, 37^44. 

Barkley, R. A. (1990). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and treat¬ 
ment. New York, NY: Guilford. 



References 353 


Barkley, R. A., Karlsson, J., & Pollard, S. (1985). Effects of age on the mother-child interactions of 
hyperactive children. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 13, 631-638. 

Barlow, D. H. (1997). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder: Current status. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 58 (Suppl. 2), 32-35. 

Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2000). Cognitive behavioral therapy, 
imipramine, or their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of 
the American Medical Association, 283, 2529-2536. 

Bamow, S., Lucht, M., & Freyberger, H. J. (2005). Correlates of aggressive and delinquent conduct 
problems in adolescence. Aggressive Behavior, 31, 24-39. 

Barry, C. T., Frick, P. J., DeShazo, T. M., McCoy, M. G., Ellis, M., & Loney, B. R. (2000). The 
importance of callous-unemotional traits for extending the concept of psychopathy to children. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 335-340. 

Ba§oglu, M., & Mineka, S. (1992). The role of uncontrollable and unpredictable stress in post- 
traumatic stress responses in torture survivors. In M. Ba§oglu (Ed.), Torture and its conse¬ 
quences: Current treatment approaches (pp. 182-225). Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Ba§oglu, M., & Paker, M. (1995). Severity of trauma as predictor of long-term psychological status 
in survivors of torture. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 339-350. 

Ba§oglu, M., Paker, M., Paker, 6., Ozmen, E., Marks, I., Incesu, C., . . . Sarimurat, N. (1994). 
Psychological effects of torture: A comparison of tortured with nontortured political activists in 
Turkey. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 76-81. 

Bass, C., Peveler, R., & House, A. (2001). Somatoform disorders: Severe psychiatric illnesses 
neglected by psychiatrists. British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 11-14. 

Beach, S. R. H., Brody, G. H., Gunter, T. D., Packer, H., Wemett, P., & Philibert, R. A. (2010). Child 
maltreatment moderates the association of MAOA with symptoms of depression and antisocial 
personality disorder. Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 12-20. 

Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., & Davis, D. D. (2004). Cognitive therapy of personality disorders (2nd 
ed.). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Becker, D. F., Grilo, C. M., Edell, W. S., & McGlashen, T. H. (2000). Comorbidity of borderline 
personality disorder with other personality disorders in hospitalized adolescents and adults. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 2011-2016. 

Bellino, S., Paradiso, E., & Bogetto, F. (2008). Efficacy and tolerability of pharmacotherapies for 
borderline personality disorder. CNS Drugs, 22, 671-692. 

Ben Amor, L., Grizenko, H., Schwartz, G. Lageix, P., Baron, C., Ter-Stepanian, M., . . . Joober, R. 
(2005). Perinatal complications in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and 
their unaffected siblings. Review of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 30, 120-126. 

Bentall, R. P, & Taylor, J. L. (2006). Psychological processes and paranoia: Implications for forensic 
behavioural science. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 24, 277-294. 

Benyon, S., Soares-Weiser, K., Woolacott, N., Duffy, S., & Geddes, J. R. (2008). Psychosocial inter¬ 
ventions for the prevention of relapse in bipolar disorder: Systematic review of controlled tri¬ 
als. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 5-11. 

Berenson, K. R., Downey, G., Rafaeli, E., Coifman, K. G., & Paquin, N. L. (2011). The rejection- 
rage contingency in borderline personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. Advance 
online publication. 

Berking, M., Margraff, M., Ebert, D., Wupperman, R, Hofmann, S. G., & Junghanns, K. (2011). 
Deficits in emotion-regulation skills predict alcohol use during and after cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for alcohol dependence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, Advance 
online publication. 

Bermingham, S. L., Cohen, A., Hague, J., & Parsonage, M. (2010). The cost of somatisation among 
the working-age population in England for the year 2008-2009. Mental Health in Family 
Medicine, 7, 71-84. 



354 References 


Bernstein, D. P., & Useda, J. D. (2007). Paranoid personality disorder. In W. O’Donohue, K. A. 
Fowler, & S. O. Lilienfeld (Eds.), Personality disorders: Toward the DSM-V (pp. 41-62). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Berquier, A., & Ashton, R. (1992). Characteristics of the frequent nightmare sufferer. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology , 101, 246-250. 

Bertelsen, A., & Gottesman, I. I. (1995). Schizoaffective psychoses: Genetical clues to classification. 
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 60, 7-11. 

Besiroglu, L., Uguz, F., Ozbebit, O., Ozkan, G., Cilli, A. S., & Rustem, A. (2007). Longitudinal 
assessment of symptom and subtype categories in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Depression 
and Anxiety, 24, 461^-66. 

Bettelheim, B. (1967). The empty fortress. New York, NY: Free Press. 

Beutler, L. E., Machado, P P. R, & Neufeldt, S. A. (1994). Therapist variables. In A. E. Bergin & 
S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (4th ed., pp. 229-269). 
New York, NY: Wiley. 

Bhugra, D., Popelyuk, D., & McMullen, I. (2010). Paraphilias across cultures: Contexts and contro¬ 
versies. Journal of Sex Research, 47, 242-256. 

Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Mick, E., Spencer, T., Wilens, T., Kiely, K., . . . Warburton, R. (1995). 
High risk for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder among children of parents with childhood 
onset of the disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 431-435. 

Biederman, J., Mick, E., Faraone, S. V., Braaten, E., Doyle, A., Spencer, T., . . . Johnson, M. A. 
(2002). Influence of gender on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children referred to a 
psychiatric clinic. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 36^-2. 

Billstedt, E., Gillberg, I. C., & Gillberg, C. (2007). Autism in adults: Symptom patterns and early 
childhood predictors. Use of the DISCO in a community sample followed from childhood. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48, 1102-1110. 

Binik, Y. M. (2005). Should dyspareunia be retained as a sexual dysfunction in DSM-V? Archives of 
Sexual Behavior, 34, 11-21. 

Binik, Y. M., Reissing, E., Pukall, C., Flory, N., Payne, K. A., & Khalife, S. (2002). The female 
sexual pain disorders: Genital pain or sexual dysfunction? Archives of Sexual Behavior, 31, 
425—431. 

Bischof, G., Rumpf, H.-J., Hapke, U., Meyer, C., & John, U. (2003). Types of natural recovery from 
alcohol dependence: A cluster analytic approach. Addiction, 98, 1737-1746. 

Bishop, S., Gahagan, S., & Lord, C. (2007). Re-examining the core features of autism: A comparison 
of autism spectrum disorder and fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 48, 1111-1121. 

Black, D. W., Blum, N., Pfohl, B., & Hale, N. (2004). Suicidal behavior in borderline personality 
disorder: Prevalence, risk factors, prediction, and prevention. Journal of Personality Disorders, 

18, 226-239. 

Blagrove, M., & Fisher, S. (2009). Trait-state interactions in the etiology of nightmares. Dreaming, 

19, 65-74. 

Blair, R. J. R. (2003). Neurobiological basis of psychopathy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 5-7. 
Blair, R. J. R., Jones, L., Clark, F., & Smith, M. (1997). The psychopathic individual: A lack of 
responsiveness to distress cues. Psychophysiology, 34, 192-198. 

Blair, R. J. R., Peschardt, K. S., Budhani, S., Mitchell, D. G. V., & Pine, D. S. (2006). The develop¬ 
ment of psychopathy. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 262-275. 

Blanchard, R., & Clemmensen, L. H. (1988). A test of the DSM-III-R’s implicit assumption that fetish- 
istic arousal and gender dysphoria are mutually exclusive. Journal of Sex Research, 25, 426^-32. 
Bleuler, E. (1950). Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias. New York, NY: International 
Universities Press. (Originally published 1911.) 

Bogaerts, S., Vanheule, S., Leeuw, F., & DeSmet, M. (2006). Recalled parental bonding and per¬ 
sonality disorders in a sample of exhibitionists: A comparative study. The Journal of Forensic 
Psychiatry and Psychology, 17, 636-646. 



References 355 


Bohus, M., Haaf, B., Simms, T., Limberger, M. F., Schmahl, C., Unckel, C., . . . Linehan, M. M. 
(2004). Effectiveness of inpatient dialectical behavioral therapy for borderline personality dis¬ 
order: A controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 487-499. 

Bonanno, G. A., Galea, S., Bucciarelli, A., & Vlahov, D. (2007). What predicts psychological resil¬ 
ience after disaster? The role of demographics, resources, and life stress. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 75, 671-682. 

Bootzin, R. R., & Epstein, D. R. (2011). Understanding and treating insomnia. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 7, 7.1-7.24. 

Bordo, S. (1997). Anorexia nervosa: Psychopathology as the crystallization of culture. In M. M. 
Gergen & S. N. Davis (Eds.), Toward a new psychology of gender (pp. 423-4-53). New York, 
NY: Routledge. 

Bosworth, H. B., Bartash, R. M., Olsen, M. K., & Steffens, D. C. (2003). The association of psycho¬ 
social factors and depression with hypertension among older adults. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 18, 1142-1148. 

Both, S., Laan, E., & Schultz, W. (2010). Disorders in sexual desire and sexual arousal in women, a 
2010 state of the art. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics & Gynecology, 31, 207-218. 

Bower, H. (2001). The gender identity disorder in the DSM-IV classification: A critical evaluation. 
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 35, 1-8. 

Bradford, J. M. (2001). The neurobiology, neuropharmacology, and pharmacological treatment of the 
paraphilias and compulsive sexual behavior. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 46, 26-34. 

Bradley, R., Greene, J., Russ, E., Dutra, L., & Westen, D. (2005). A multidimensional meta-analysis 
of psychotherapy for PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 214-227. 

Braham, L. G., Trower, P., & Birchwood, M. (2004). Acting on command hallucinations and danger¬ 
ous behavior: A critique of the major findings in the last decade. Clinical Psychology Review, 
24, 513-528. 

Brand, B., Classen, C., Lanins, R., Loewenstein, R., McNary, S., Pain, C., & Putnam, F. (2009). 
A naturalistic study of dissociative identity disorder and dissociative disorder not otherwise 
specified patients treated by community clinicians. Psychological Trauma : Theory, Research, 
Practice, and Policy, 1(2), 153-171. 

Breslau, J., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Kendler, K. S., Su, M., Williams, D., & Kessler, R. C. (2006). 
Specifying race-ethnic differences in risk for psychiatric disorder in a USA national sample. 
Psychological Medicine, 36, 57-68. 

Brewerton, T. D., Dansky, B. S., Kilpatrick, D. G., & O’Neil, P. M. (2000). Which comes first in 
the pathogenesis of bulimia nervosa: Dieting or bingeing? International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 20, 259-264. 

Bridges, E. (2010). Racial identity development and psychological coping strategies of African 
American males at a predominantly white university. Annals of the American Psychotherapy 
Association, 13, 14-26. 

Brimacombe, M., Ming, X., & Lamendola, M. (2007). Prenatal and birth complications in autism. 
Maternal and Child Health Journal, 11, 73-79. 

Brondolo, E., Rieppi, R., Kelly, K. P., & Gerin, W. (2003). Perceived racism and blood pressure: 
A review of the literature and conceptual and methodological critique. Annals of Behavioral 
Medicine, 25, 55-65. 

Brown, F. C., Buboltz, W. C., & Soper B. (2002). Relationship of sleep hygiene awareness sleep 
hygiene practices, and sleep quality in university students. Behavioral Medicine, 28, 33-38. 

Brown, G. W. (2002). Social roles, context and evolution in the origins of depression. Journal of 
Health and Social Behavior, 43, 255-276. 

Brown, G. W., & Harris, T. (1978). Social origins of depression: A study of psychiatric disorder in 
women. New York, NY: Free Press. 

Bulik, C. M., Thornton, L. M., Root, T. L., Pisetsky, E. M., Lichtenstein, R, & Pedersen, N. L. 
(2010). Understanding the relation between anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa in a Swedish 
national twin sample. Biological Psychiatry, 67, 71-77. 



356 References 


Burns, A. S., Rivas, D. A., & Ditunno, J. F. (2001). The management of neurogenic bladder and 
sexual dysfunction after spinal cord injury. Spine, 26, S129-S136. 

Burt, S. A., Krueger, R. F., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. G. (2001). Sources of covariation among 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, and conduct disorder: The 
importance of shared environment. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 516-525. 

Bustillo, J. R., Lauriello, J., Horan, W. P., & Keith, S. J. (2001). The psychosocial treatment of schiz¬ 
ophrenia: An update. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 163-175. 

Byrne, S. M., & McLean, N. J. (2002). The cognitive-behavioral model of bulimia nervosa: A direct 
evaluation. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 31, 17-31. 

Cade, J. F. J. (1949). Lithium salts in the treatment of psychotic excitement. Medical Journal of 
Australia, 36, 349-352. 

Cadoret, R. J., Yates, W. R., Troughton, E., Woodworth, G., & Stewart, M. A. (1995b). Genetic- 
environment interaction in the genesis of aggressivity and conduct disorders. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 52, 916-924. 

Calhoun, K. S., & Wilson, A. E. (2000). Rape and sexual aggression. In L. T. Szuchman & 
F. Muscarella (Eds.), Psychological perspectives on human sexuality (pp. 573-602). New York, 
NY: Wiley. 

Cameron, N. (1959). The paranoid pseudo-community revisited. American Journal of Sociology, 65, 
52-58. 

Campo, J., Nijman, H., Merckelbach, H., Evers, C. (2003). Psychiatric comorbidity of gender iden¬ 
tity disorders: A survey among Dutch psychiatrists. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 
1332-1336. 

Cannon, T. D., Kaprio, J., Loennqvist, J., Huttunen, M., & Koskenvuo, M. (1998). The genetic 
epidemiology of schizophrenia in a Finnish twin cohort: A population-based modeling study. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 61-1 A. 

Casper, R. C., & Troiani, M. (2001). Family functioning in anorexia nervosa differs by subtypes. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 30, 338-342. 

Castellanos, F. X., Giedd, J. N., Marsh, W. L., Hamburger, S. D., Vaituzis, A. C., Dickstein, D. R, 

. . . Rapoport, J. L. (1996). Quantitative brain magnetic resonance imaging in attention deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 607-616. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2009). Perceived insufficient rest or sleep 
among adults-United States, 2008. Journal of American Medical Association, 302, 2532-2539. 

Cheniaux, E., Landeira-Femandez, J., Telles, L. Lessa, J. M., Dias, A., Duncan, T., & Versiani, M. 
(2008). Does schizoaffective disorder really exist? A systematic review of the studies that com¬ 
pared schizoaffective disorder with schizophrenia or mood. Journal of Affective Disorders, 106, 
209-217. 

Cheyne, J. A. (2002). Situational factors affecting sleep paralysis and associated hallucinations: 
Position and timing effects. Journal of Sleep Research, 11, 169-177. 

Cheyne, J. A., Newby-Clark, I. R., & Rueffer, S. D. (1999). Relations among hypnagogic and 
hypnopompic experiences associated with sleep paralysis. Journal of Sleep Research, 8, 
313-317. 

Chioqueta, A. R, & Stiles, T. C. (2004). Suicide risk in patients with somatization disorder. Crisis, 
25, 3-7. 

Chivers, M. L., & Bailey, J. M. (2000). Sexual orientation of female-to-male transsexuals: A com¬ 
parison of homosexual and nonhomosexual types. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 29, 259-278. 

Christakis, D. A., Zimmerman, F. J., DiGiuseppe, D. L., & McCarty, C. A. (2004). Early television 
exposure and subsequent attentional problems in children. Pediatrics, 113, 708-713. 

Christensen, B. S., Grpnbtek, M., Osier, M., Pedersen, B. V., Graugaard, C., & Frisch, M. (2011). 
Sexual dysfunctions and difficulties in Denmark: Prevalence and associated sociodemographic 
factors. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 121-132. 

Chronis, A. M., Chacko, A., Fabiano, G. A., Wymbs, B. T., & Pelham, W. E. (2004). Enhancements 
to the behavioral parent training paradigm for families of children with ADHD: Review and 
future directions. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 7, 1-27. 



References 357 


Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. L. (2004). Child maltreatment. Annual Reviews in Clinical Psychology, 
Reviews in Advance, 1, 1-30. 

Citrome, L., & Volavka, J. (2000). Management of violence in schizophrenia. Psychiatric Annals, 30, 
41-52. 

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Ost, L. G., Breitholtz, E., Koehler, K., Westling, B. E., . . . Gelder, 
M. (1997). Misinterpretation of body sensations in panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 65, 203-213. 

Clark, R. (2006). Perceived racism and vascular reactivity in Black college women: Moderating 
effects of seeking social support. Health Psychology, 25, 20-25. 

Clark, R., Anderson, N. B., Clark, V. R., & Williams, D. R. (1999). Racism as a stressor for African 
Americans: A biopsychosocial model. American Psychologist, 54, 805-816. 

Clark, R. E., Bartels, S. J., Mellman, T. A., & Peacock, W. J. (2002). Recent trends in antipsychotic 
combination therapy of schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders: Implications for state 
mental health policy. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 28, 75-84. 

Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kemberg, O. F. (2004). The Personality Disorders 
Institute/Borderline Personality Disorder Research Foundation randomized control trial for 
borderline personality disorder: Rationale, methods, and patient characteristics. Journal of 
Personality Disorders, 18, 52-72. 

Clayton, A. H. (2007). Epidemiology and neurobiology of female sexual dysfunction. Journal of 
Sexual Medicine, 4, 260-268. 

Clayton, A. H., & West, S. G. (2003). The effects of antidepressants on human sexuality. Primary 
Psychiatry, 10, 62-70. 

Cleckley, H. E. (1976). The mask of sanity. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. 

Clemans, K. H., DeRose, L. M., Graber, J. A., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2010). Gender in adolescence: 
Applying a person-in-context approach to gender identity and roles. In J. C. Chrisler & D. R. 
McCreary (Eds.), Handbook of gender research in psychology: Vol 1. Gender research in gen¬ 
eral and experimental psychology (pp. 527-557). New York, NY: Springer. 

Cohen, A. N., Hammen, C., Henry, R. M., & Daley, S. E. (2004). Effects of stress and social support 
on recurrence in bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 82, 143-147. 

Cohen, E., Feinn, R., Arias, A., & Kranzler, H. R. (2007). Alcohol treatment utilization: Findings 
from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence, 86, 214-221. 

Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., & Arrindell, W. A. (1990). Perceived parental rearing style, parental divorce 
and transsexualism: A controlled study. Psychological Medicine, 20, 613-620. 

Colby, K. M. (1977). Appraisal of four psychological theories of paranoid phenomena. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 86, 54-59. 

Cole, T. B. (2006). Rape at US Colleges often fueled by alcohol. JAMA: Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 296, 504-505. 

Compton, A. (1992). The psychoanalytic view of phobias: III. Agoraphobia and other phobias of 
adults. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 61, 400^-25. 

Conway, K. P., Compton, W., Stinson, F. S., & Grant, B. F. (2006). Lifetime comorbidity of DSM-IV 
mood and anxiety disorders and specific drug use disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 
247-257. 

Coolidge, F. L., Thede, L. L., & Young, S. E. (2002). The heritability of gender identity disorder in a 
child and adolescent twin sample. Behavior Genetics, 32, 251-257. 

Cooper, M. J. (2005). Cognitive theory in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: Progress, develop¬ 
ment and future directions. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 511-531. 

Cooper, M. J., Todd, G., & Wells, A. (2002). Content, origins, and consequences of dysfunctional 
beliefs in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. In R. L. Leahy & E. T. Dowd (Eds.) Clinical 
advances in cognitive psychotherapy: Theory and application. New York, NY: Springer. 

Cooper, Z., & Fairbum, C. G. (2010). Cognitive behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. In C. M. Grilo 
& J. E. Mitchell (Eds.), The treatment of eating disorders: A clinical handbook (pp. 243-270). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press. 



358 References 


Costello, E. J., Compton, S. N., Keeler, G., & Angold, A. (2003). Relationships between poverty and psy¬ 
chopathology: A natural experiment. Journal of American Medical Association, 290, 2023-2029. 

Craig, T. K. J., Boardman, A. P., Mills, K., Daly-Jones, O., & Drake, H. (1993). The South London 
Somatisation Study: I. Longitudinal course and the influence of early life experiences. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 579-588. 

Craig, T. K. J., Drake, H., Mills, K., & Boardman, A. P. (1994). The South London Somatisation 
Study: II. Influence of stressful life events, and secondary gain. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
165, 248-258. 

Craske, M. G., Roy-Byrne, P. P., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., Sherboume, C., & Bystritsky, A. (2009). 
Treatment for anxiety disorders: Efficacy to effectiveness to implementation. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 47, 931-937. 

Crick, N. R., & Zahn-Waxler, C. (2003). The development of psychopathology in females and males: 
Current progress and future challenges. Development and psychopathology, 15, 719-742. 

Crimlisk, H. L., Bhatia, K. P, Cope, H., David, A. S., Marsden, D., & Ron, M. A. (2000). Patterns 
of referral in patients with medically unexplained motor symptoms. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 49, 217-219. 

Critchfield, K. L., Levy, K. N., Clarkin, J. F., & Kernberg, O. F. (2008). The relational context of 
aggression in borderline personality disorder: Using adult attachment style to predict forms 
of hostility. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 64, 67-82. 

Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P, Gatzke-Kopp, L., Sylvers, P, Mead, H., & Chipman-Chacon, J. 
(2006). Autonomic correlates of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and oppositional defi¬ 
ant disorder in preschool children. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115, 174-178. 

Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P, & Linehan, M. M. (2009). A biosocial developmental model of 
borderline personality: Elaborating and extending Linehan’s theory. Psychological Bulletin, 
135, 495-510. 

Csigo, K. K., Harsanyi, A. A., Demeter, G. Y., Rajkai, C. S., Nemeth, A. A., & Racsmany, M. M. 
(2010). Long-term follow-up of patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder treated by ante¬ 
rior capsulotomy: A neuropsychological study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 126, 198-205. 

Cunningham, J. A., Blomqvist, J., Koski-Jannes, A., & Cordingley, J. (2005). Maturing out of drink¬ 
ing problems: Perceptions of natural history as a function of severity. Addiction Research and 
Theory, 13, 79-84. 

Curtis, N. M., Ronan, K. R., & Borduin, C. M. (2004). Multisystemic treatment: A metaanalysis of 
outcome studies. Journal of Family Psychology, 18, 411-419. 

Dahlitz, M., & Parkes, J. D. (1993). Sleep paralysis. Lancet, 341, 406-408. 

Daley, D. (2006). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: A review of the essential facts. Child Care, 
Health & Development, 32, 193-204. 

Dandescu, A., & Wolfe, R. (2003). Considerations on fantasy use by child molesters and exhibition¬ 
ists. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment, 15, 297-305. 

Davies, O. (2003). The nightmare experience, sleep paralysis, and witch accusations. Folklore, 
774,181-203. 

Davison, G. C. (1968). Elimination of a sadistic fantasy by a client-controlled counterconditioning 
technique. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 73, 84-90. 

Davison, G. C., Williams, M. E., Nezami, E., Bice, T. L., & DeQuattro, V. (1991). Relaxation, reduc¬ 
tion in angry articulated thoughts, and improvements in borderline essential hypertension and 
heart rate. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 14, 453—468. 

De Cuypere, G., Van Hemelruck, M., Michel, A., Caael, B., Hey lens, G., Rubens, R., . . . Monstrey, 
S. (2007). Prevalence and demography of transsexualism in Belgium. European Psychiatry, 22, 
137-141. 

De Gucht, V., & Heiser, W. (2003). Alexithymia and somatisation: A quantitative review of the litera¬ 
ture. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 54, 425^-34. 

Deater-Deckard, K., Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G. S. (1996). Physical discipline among 
African-American and European-American mothers: Links to children’s externalizing behav¬ 
iors. Developmental Psychology, 32, 1065-1072. 



References 359 


Dell’Osso, B., Nestadt, G., Allen, A., & Hollander, E. (2006). Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A critical review. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 600-610. 

Diamond, M. (2009). Clinical implications of the organizational and activational effects of hor¬ 
mones. Hormones and Behavior, 55, 621-632. 

Dikeos, D. G., & Soldatos, C. R. (2005). The condition of insomnia: Etiopathogenetic considerations 
and their impact on treatment practices. International Review of Psychiatry, 17, 255-262. 

Dindo, L., & Fowles, D. (2011). Dual temperamental risk factors for psychopathic personality: 
Evidence from self-report and skin conductance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
100, 557-566. 

Dogan, S. J., Conger, R. D., Kim, K. J., & Masyn, K. E.(2007). Cognitive and parenting pathways 
in the transmission of antisocial behavior from parents to adolescents. Child Development, 78, 
335-349. 

Dorahy, M. J., Mills, H., Taggart, C., O’Kane, M., & Mulholland, C. (2006). Do dissociative dis¬ 
orders exist in Northern Ireland?: Blind psychiatric—structured interview assessments of 20 
complex psychiatric patients. European Journal of Psychiatry, 20, 172-182. 

Dressier, W. W. (2004). Culture and the risk of disease. British Medical Bulletin, 69, 21-31. 

Dubbert, R (1995). Behavioral (life style) modification in the prevention and treatment of hyperten¬ 
sion. Clinical Psychology Review, 15, 187-216. 

Dunsieth, N. W., Nelson, E. B., Brusman-Lovins, L. A., Holcomb, J. L., Beckman, D., Welge, 
J. A., . . . McElroy, S. L. (2004). Psychiatric and legal features of 113 men convicted of sexual 
offenses. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 65, 293-300. 

Eaton, W. W., Anthony, J. C., Romanoski, A., Tien, A., Gallo, J., Cai, G., . . . Chen, L. S. (1998). 
Onset and recovery from panic disorder in the Baltimore Epidemiologic Catchment Area 
follow-up. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 501-507. 

Eaves, L., Rutter, M., Silberg, J. L., Shillady, L., Maes, H., & Pickles, A. (2000). Genetic and envi¬ 
ronmental causes of covariation in interview assessments of disruptive behavior in child and 
adolescent twins. Behavior Genetics, 30, 321-334. 

Eaves, L. J., Silberg, J. L., Meyer, J. M., Maes, H. H., Simonoff, E., Pickles, A., . . . Hewitt, J. K. 
(1997). Genetics and developmental psychopathology: 2. The main effects of genes and 
environment on behavioral problems in the Virginia Twin Study of Adolescent Behavioral 
Development. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 38, 965-980. 

Eckert, E. D., Halmi, K. A., Marchi, P., Grove, W., & Crosby, R. (1995). Ten-year-follow-up of ano¬ 
rexia nervosa: Clinical course and outcome. Psychological Medicine, 25, 143-156. 

Eddy, K. T., Keel, P. K., Dorer, D. J., Delinsky, S. S., Franko, D. L., & Herzog, D. B. (2002). 
Longitudinal comparison of anorexia nervosa subtypes. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 20, 191-201. 

Edenberg, H. J., & Foroud, T. (2006). The genetics of alcoholism: Identifying specific genes through 
family studies. Addiction Biology, 11, 386-396. 

Edens, J. F., Marcus, D. K., Lilienfeld, S. O., & Poythress, N. G. (2006). Psychopathic, not psycho¬ 
path: Taxometric evidence for the dimensional structure of psychopathy. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 115, 131-144. 

Egger, H. L., Kondo, D., & Angold, A. (2006). The epidemiology and diagnostic issues in preschool 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A review. Infants and Young Children, 19, 109-122. 

Eisen, J. L., Phillips, K. A., & Rasmussen, S. A. (1999). Obsessions and delusions: The relation¬ 
ship between obsessive-compulsive disorder and the psychotic disorders. Psychiatric Annals, 
29, 515-522. 

Elbogen, E. B., Van Dorn, R. A., Swanson, J. W., Swartz, M. S., & Monahan, J. (2006). Treatment 
engagement and violence risk in mental disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 
354-360. 

Elkins, I. J., King, S. M., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. G. (2006). Personality traits and the develop¬ 
ment of nicotine, alcohol, and illicit drug disorders: Prospective links from adolescence to 
young adulthood. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 115, 25-39. 



360 References 


Ellason, J. W., & Ross, C. A. (1997). Two-year follow-up of inpatients with dissociative disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 832-839. 

Elliott, D. M., Mok, D. S., & Briere, J. (2004). Adult sexual assault: Prevalence, symptomatology, 
and sex differences in the general population. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 17, 203-211. 

Emmers-Sommer, T. M., Allen, M., Bourhis, J., Sahlstein, E., Laskowski, K., Falato, W. L., . . . 
Cashman, L. (2004). A meta-analysis of the relationship between social skills and sexual 
offenders. Communication Reports, 17, 1-10. 

Eronen, M. (1995). Mental disorders and homicidal behavior in female subjects. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 152, 1216-1218. 

Esterberg, M. L., Goulding, S. M., & Walker, E. F. (2010). Cluster A personality disorders: 
Schizotypal, schizoid and paranoid personality disorders in childhood and adolescence. Journal 
of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 32, 515-528. 

Faber, S. D., & Burns, J. W. (1996). Anger management style, degree of expressed anger, and gen¬ 
der influence cardiovascular recovery from interpersonal harassment. Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine, 19, 31-53. 

Fairbum, C. (2005). Evidence-based treatment of anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 37, S26-S30. 

Fairbum, C. G. (1995). Overcoming binge eating. New York, NY: Guilford. 

Fairbum, C. G., & Cooper, Z. (2007). Thinking afresh about the classification of eating disorders. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40, S107-S110. 

Farag, N. H., & Mills, P. J. (2004). What’s next in behavioral hypertension research? Annals of 
Behavioral Medicine, 27, 1-2. 

Farmer, A., Elkin, A., & McGuffin, P. (2007). The genetics of bipolar affective disorder. Current 
Opinion in Psychiatry, 20, 8-12. 

Farmer, E. M. Z., Compton, S. N., Burns, B. J., & Robertson, E. (2002). Review of the evidence base 
for treatment of childhood psychopathology: Externalizing disorders. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 70, 1267-1302. 

Farsimadan, F., Draghi-Lorenz, R., & Ellis, J. (2007). Process and outcome of therapy in ethnically 
similar and dissimilar therapeutic dyads. Psychotherapy Research, 17, 567-575. 

Fazel, S., & Danesh, J. (2002). Serious mental disorder in 23,000 prisoners: A systematic review of 
62 surveys. Lancet, 359, 545-550. 

Fedora, O., Reddon, J. R., & Yeudall, L. T. (1986). Stimuli eliciting sexual arousal in genital exhibi¬ 
tionists: A possible clinical application. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 15, 417-427. 

Feigenbaum, J. (2007). Dialectical behaviour therapy: An increasing evidence base. Journal of 
Mental Health, 16, 51-68. 

Ferguson, C. J., Winegard, B., & Winegard, B. M. (2011). Who is the fairest one of all? How evo¬ 
lution guides peer and media influences on female body dissatisfaction. Review of General 
Psychology, 15, 11-28. 

Ferguson, C. P, & Pigott, T. A. (2000). Anorexia and bulimia nervosa: Neurobiology and pharmaco¬ 
therapy. Behavior Therapy, 31, 237-263. 

Fernander, A. F., Duran, R. E. F., Saab, P. G., & Schneiderman, N. (2004). John Henry active cop¬ 
ing, education, and blood pressure among urban blacks. Journal of the National Medical 
Association, 96, 246-255. 

Fink, P. (1992). Surgery and medical treatment in persistent somatizing patients. Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research, 36, 439^447. 

Finney, J. W., & Moos, R. H. (1998). Psychosocial treatments for alcohol use disorders. In P. E. 
Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (pp. 156-166). New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press. 

Firestone, P, Kingston, D. A., Wexler, A., & Bradford, J. M. (2006). Long-term follow-up of exhi¬ 
bitionists: Psychological, phallometric, and offense characteristics. Journal of the American 
Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 34, 349-359. 

Fishbain, D. A., Lewis, J. E., Gao, J., Cole, B., & Rosomoff, R. S. (2009). Is chronic pain associ¬ 
ated with somatization/hypochondriasis? An evidence-based structured review. Pain Practice, 
9, 449^167. 



References 361 


Fleck, F. (2004). MMR controversy raises questions about publication ethics. Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization, 82, 311-312. 

Flensborg-Madsen, T., Knop, J., Mortensen, E. L., Becker, U., & Grpnbaek, M. (2007). Amount 
of alcohol consumption and risk of developing alcoholism in men and women. Alcohol & 
Alcoholism, 42, 442-447. 

Flory, K., & Lynam, D. R. (2003). The relation between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and 
substance abuse: What role does conduct disorder play? Clinical Child and Family Psychology 
Review, 6, 1-16. 

Foa, E. B., & Franklin, M. E. (2001). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Clinical 
handbook of psychological disorders: A step-by-step treatment manual (3rd ed., pp. 209-263). 
New York, NY: Guilford. 

Foa, E. B., Keane, T., Friedman, M., & Cohen, J. (Eds.). (2009). Effective treatments for PTSD: 
Practice guidelines from the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (2nd ed.). New 
York, NY: Guilford Press. 

Foa, E. B., & Riggs, D. S. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder following assault: Theoretical con¬ 
siderations and empirical findings. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 61-65. 

Foley, D. L., Eaves, L. J., Wormley, B., Silberg, J. L., Maes, H. H., Kuhn, J., & Riley, B. (2004). 
Childhood adversity, monoamine oxidase A genotype, and risk for conduct disorder. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 61, 738-744. 

Fontenelle, L. F., Mendlowicz, M. V., & Versiani, M. (2006). The descriptive epidemiology of obses¬ 
sive-compulsive disorder. Progress in Neuro-Psychpharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 30, 
327-337. 

Forbes, D., Creamer, M., Bisson, J. I., Cohen, J. A., Crow, B. E., Foa, E. B., . . . Ursano, R. J. (2010). 
A guide to guidelines for the treatment of PTSD and related conditions. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 23, 537-552. 

Ford, J. D., Racusin, R., Daviss, W. B., Ellis, C. G., Thomas, J., Rogers, K., . . . Sengupta, 
A. (1999). Trauma exposure among children with oppositional defiant disorder and attention 
deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 786-789. 

Forrest, K. A. (2001). Toward an etiology of dissociative identity disorder: A neurodevelopmental 
approach. Consciousness and Cognition, 10, 259-293. 

Frances, A., First, M. B., & Pincus, H. A. (1995). DSM-IV guidebook. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Press. 

Franco-Paredes, K., Mancilla-Diaz, J. M., Vazquez-Arevalo, R., Lopez-Aguilar, X., & Alvarez- 
Rayon, G. (2005). Perfectionism and eating disorders: A review of the literature. European 
Eating Disorders Review, 13, 61-70. 

Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s guide to interpersonal and social rhythm 
therapy. New York, NY: Guilford. 

Freud, S. (1925). Mourning and melancholia. In Sigmund Freud, Collected papers, Volume IV (A. 
Strachey & J. Strachey, Trans.). London, England: Hogarth Press. (Originally published in 
Zeitschrift, 1917.) 

Freud, S. (1925). Psycho-analytic notes upon an autobiographical account of a case of paranoia 
(dementia Paranoides). In Sigmund Freud, Collected papers, Volume III (A. Strachey & J. 
Strachey, Trans.). London, England: Hogarth Press. (Originally published in Jahrbuch fur psy- 
choanalytische undpsychopathologische Forschungen, 1909.) 

Freund, K., & Watson, R. (1990). Mapping the boundaries of courtship disorder. Journal of Sex 
Research, 27, 589-606. 

Friedman, M. J. (2009). PTSD and other posttraumatic syndromes. In D. McKay, J. S. Abramowitz, 
S. Taylor, & G. G. Asmundson (Eds.), Current perspectives on the anxiety disorders: 
Implications for DSM-V and beyond (pp. 377^409). New York, NY: Springer. 

Friedman, S. H., & Loue, S. (2007). Incidence and prevalence of intimate partner violence by and 
against women with severe mental illness. Journal of Women’s Health, 16, 471^-80. 

Fritz, G. K., Fritsch, S., & Hagino, O. (1997). Somatoform disorders in children and adolescents: 
A review of the past 10 years. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 36, 1329-1338. 



362 References 


Fullana, M. A., Mataix-cols, D., Caspi, A., Harrington, H., Grisham, J. R., Moffitt, T. E., & Poulton, 
R. (2009). Obsessions and compulsions in the community: Stability, and co-occurring psychiat¬ 
ric conditions. Psychiatry: Interpersonal and Biological Processes , 329-336. 

Funder, D. C. (1999). Personality judgment: A realistic approach to person perception. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 

Gangestad, S. W., Bailey, J. M., & Martin, N. G. (2000). Taxometric analyses of sexual orientation 
and gender identity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 1109-1121. 

Gao, Y., & Raine, A. (2010). Successful and unsuccessful psychopaths: A neurobiological model. 
Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 28, 194-210. 

Gamer, D. M., & Magana, C. (2002). Bulimia nervosa. In M. Hersen & L. K. Porzelius (Eds.), 
Diagnosis, conceptualization, and treatment planning for adults: A step-by-step guide 
(pp. 251-269). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Gastfriend, D. R., Garbutt, J. C, Pettinati, H. M., & Forman, R. F. (2007). Reduction in heavy drinking 
as a treatment outcome in alcohol dependence. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 33, 71-80. 

Gatward, N. (2007). Anorexia nervosa: An evolutionary puzzle. European Eating Disorders Review, 
15, 1-12. 

Gaultney, J. F. (2010). The prevalence of sleep disorders in college students: Impact on academic 
performance. Journal of American College Health, 59, 91-97. 

Gearson, J. S., Kaltman, S. I., Brown, C., & Bellack, A. S. (2003). Traumatic life events and PTSD 
among women with substance use disorders and schizophrenia. Psychiatric Services, 54, 523-528. 

Geller, R. E., & Goldberg, J. F. (2007). A review of evidence-based psychotherapies for bipolar dis¬ 
order. Primary Psychiatry, 14, 59-69. 

Germain, A., Krakow, B., Faucher, B., Zadra, A., Nielsen, T., Hollifield, M., . . . Koss, M. (2004). 
Increased mastery elements associated with imagery rehearsal treatment for nightmares in sex¬ 
ual assault survivors with PTSD. Dreaming, 14, 195-206. 

Ghizzani, A., & Montomoli, M. (2000). Anorexia nervosa and sexuality in women: A revew. Journal 
of Sex Education and Therapy, 25, 80-88. 

Gillig, P. (2009). Dissociative identity disorder: A controversial diagnosis. Psychiatry, 6, 24-29. 

Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and women’s development. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Gillock, K. L., Zayfert, C., Hegel, M. T., & Ferguson, R. J. (2005). Posttraumatic stress disorder 
in primary care: Prevalence and relationships with physical symptoms and medical utilization. 
General Hospital Psychiatry, 27, 392-399. 

Giron, M. M., Fernandez-Yanez, A. A., Mana-Alvarenga, S. S., Molina-Habas, A. A., Nolasco, A. A., & 
Gomez-Beneyto, M. M. (2010). Efficacy and effectiveness of individual family intervention on 
social and clinical functioning and family burden in severe schizophrenia: A 2-year randomized 
controlled study. Psychological Medicine, 40, 73-84. 

Gleaves, D. H., May, M. C., & Cardena, E. (2001). An examination of the diagnostic validity of dis¬ 
sociative identity disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 21, 577-608. 

Godlee, F., Smith, J., & Marcovitch, H. (2011). Wakefield’s article linking MMR vaccine and autism 
was fraudulent. British Medical Journal, 342. 

Goldbacher, E. M., Matthews, K. A., & Salomon, K. (2005). Central adiposity is associated with car¬ 
diovascular reactivity to stress in adolescents. Health Psychology, 24, 375-384. 

Goldstein, L. H., Harvey, E. A., Friedman-Weieneth, J. I., Pierce, C., Tellert, A., & Sippel, J. C. 
(2007). Examining subtypes of behavior problems among 3-year-old children, Part II: 
Investigating differences in parent psychopathology, couple conflict, and other family stressors. 
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 35, 111-123. 

Goodman, R., & Stevenson, J. (1989). A twin study of hyperactivity: II. The aetiological role 
of genes, family relationships, and perinatal adversity. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 30, 691-709. 



References 363 


Gordon, H. (2008). The treatment of paraphilias: An historical perspective. Criminal Behaviour and 
Mental Health, 18, 79-87. 

Gossop, M., Harris, J., Best, D., Man, L. H., Manning, V., Marshall, J., & Strang, J. (2003). Is attend¬ 
ance at Alcoholics Anonymous meetings after inpatient treatment related to improved out¬ 
comes? A 6-month follow-up study. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 38, 421-426. 

Gotlib, I. H., & Joormann, J. (2010). Cognition and depression: Current status and future directions. 

Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 285-312. 

Gottesman, 1.1., & Goldsmith, H. H. (1994). Developmental psychopathology of antisocial behavior: 
Inserting genes into its ontogenesis and epigenesis. In C. A. Nelson (Ed.), Threats to optimal 
development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. 

Gottesman, I. I., & Hanson, D. R. (2005). Human development: Biological and genetic processes. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 263-286. 

Gottlieb, S. (2006). Some thoughts on Schreber (and Freud): Depression, paranoia and a delusional 
system. British Journal of Psychotherapy, 22, 427-447. 

Grabe, H. J., Ruhrmann, S., Ettelt, S., Buhtz, F., Hochrein, A., Schulze-Rauschenbach, S., . . . 
Wagner, M. (2006). Familiality of obsessive-compulsive disorder in nonclinical and clinical 
subjects. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1986-1992. 

Graham, J. E., Christian, L. M., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (2006). Stress, age, and immune function: 

Toward a lifespan approach. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 29, 389^400. 

Granic, I., & Patterson, G. R. (2006). Toward a comprehensive model of antisocial development: A 
dynamic systems approach. Psychological Review, 113, 101-131. 

Grant, B. F., Chou, S. P., Goldstein, R. B., Huang, B., Stinson, F. S., Saha, T. D., . . . Ruan, W. J. 
(2008). Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity of DSM-IV borderline personal¬ 
ity disorder: Results from the Wave 2 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related 
Conditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 533-545. 

Grant, B. F., Hasin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P, Ruan, W. J., & Pickering, 
R. P. (2004). Prevalence, correlates, and disability of personality disorders in the United States: 
Results from the National Epidemiological Survey and Alcohol and Related Conditions. 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 948-958. 

Grant, B. F., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P, & Ruan, W. J. (2005). Cooccurrence of 
DSM-IV personality disorders in the United States: Results from the National Epidemiologic 
Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 46, 1-5. 

Grant, J. E. (2005). Clinical characteristics and psychiatric comorbidity in males with exhibitionism. 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 66, 1367-1371. 

Gratz, K. L., Rosenthal, M. Z., Tull, M. T., Lejuez, C. W., & Gunderson, J. G. (2006). An experi¬ 
mental investigation of emotional dysregulation in borderline personality disorder. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 115, 850-855. 

Greaves, G. B. (1980). Multiple personality: 165 years after Mary Reynolds. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 168, 577-596. 

Green, R. (1987). The ‘sissy boy syndrome’ and the development of homosexuality. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press. 

Green, R. (1994). Transsexualism and the law. Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and 
the Law, 22, 511-517. 

Greene, R. W., Ablon, J. S., Monuteaux, M. C., Goring, J. C., Henin, A., Raezer-Blakely, L., . . . 
Rabbitb, S. (2004). Effectiveness of collaborative problem solving in affectively dysregulated 
children with oppositional-defiant disorder: Initial findings. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 72, 1157-1164. 

Greene, R. W., & Doyle, A. E. (1999). Toward a transactional conceptualization of oppositional defi¬ 
ant disorder: Implications for assessment and treatment. Clinical Child and Family Psychology 
Review, 2, 129-148. 



364 References 


Grenier, G., & Byers, E. S. (1995). Rapid ejaculation: A review of conceptual, etiological, and treat¬ 
ment issues. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 24, 447-472. 

Gretton, H. M., Hare, R. D., & Catchpole, R. E. H. (2004). Psychopathy and offending from adolescence 
to adulthood: A 10-year follow-up. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 636-645. 

Greydanus, D. E., Nazeer, A., & Patel, D. R. (2009). Psychopharmacology of ADHD in pediatrics: 
Current advances and issues. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 5, 171-181. 

Guimont, C., Brisson, C., Dagenais, G. R., Milot, A., Vezina, M., Masse, B., . . . Blanchette, C. 
(2006). Effects of job strain on blood pressure: A prospective study of male and female white- 
collar workers. American Journal of Public Health, 96, 1436-1443. 

Guisinger, S. (2003). Adapted to flee famine: Adding an evolutionary perspective on anorexia ner¬ 
vosa. Psychological Review, 110, 745-761. 

Gunter, T. D., Vaughn, M. G., & Philibert, R. A. (2010). Behavioral genetics in antisocial spectrum 
disorders and psychopathy: A review of the recent literature. Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 
28, 148-173. 

Gureje, O., Simon, G. E., Ustun, T. B., & Goldberg, D. P. (1997). Somatization in crosscultural per¬ 
spective: A World Health Organization study in primary care. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
154, 989-995. 

Guterman, J. T., Martin, C. V., & Rudes, J. (2011). A solution-focused approach to frotteurism. 
Journal of Systemic Therapies, 30, 59-72. 

Hacking, I. (1995). Rewriting the soul: Multiple personality and the sciences of memory. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Haddad, P. M., Taylor, M., & Niaz, O. S. (2009). First-generation antipsychotic long-acting injec¬ 
tions v. oral antipsychotics in schizophrenia: Systematic review of randomised controlled trials 
and observational studies. British Journal of Psychiatry, 795(Suppl 52), s20-s28. 

Hakala, M., Vahlberg, T., Niemi, P. M., & Karlsson, H. (2006). Brain glucose metabolism and 
temperament in relation to severe somatization. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 60, 
669-675. 

Halmi, K. A. (2011). Eating disorders: Anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and obesity. In R. E. 
Hales, S. C. Yudofsky & G. O. Gabbard (Eds.), Essentials of psychiatry (3rd ed., pp. 429-453). 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 

Hameed, U., Schwartz, T. L., Malhotra, K., West, R. L., & Bertone, F. (2005). Antidepressant treat¬ 
ment in the primary care office. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 17, 77-81. 

Hammen, C. (2005). Stress and depression. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 55, 11.1-11.27. 

Happe, F., Ronald, A., & Plomin, R. (2006). Time to give up on a single explanation for autism. 
Nature Neuroscience, 9, 1218-1220. 

Hardy, K. V., & Laszloffy, T. A. (1995). Therapy with African-Americans and the phenomenon of 
rage. In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 1, 57-70. 

Hare, R. D. (2006). Psychopathy: A clinical and forensic overview. Psychiatric Clinics of North 
America, 29, 709-724. 

Hare, R. D., Harpur, T. J., Hakstian, R. A., Forth, A. E., Hart, S., & Newman, J. P. (1990). The 
revised Psychopathy Checklist: Reliability and factor structure. Psychological Assessment, 2, 
338-341. 

Harkness, K. L., Alavi, N., Monroe, S. M., Slavich, G. M., Gotlib, I. H., & Bagby, R. M. (2010). 
Gender differences in life events prior to onset of major depressive disorder: The moderating 
effect of age. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 791-803. 

Harrington, R., & Bailey, S. (2004). Prevention of antisocial personality disorder: Mounting evi¬ 
dence on optimal timing and methods. Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 14, 75-81. 

Harris, A., & Lurigio, A. J. (2007). Mental illness and violence: A brief review of research and 
assessment strategies. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 12, 542-551. 

Harris, A. M., Orav, E. J., Bates, D. W., & Barksy, A. J. (2008). Somatization increases disability 
independent of comorbidity. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 24, 155-161. 

Harris, T. O. (1989). Disorders of menstruation. In G. W. Brown & T. O. Harris (Eds.), Life events 
and illness (pp. 261-294). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 



References 365 


Hartley, S. L., Barker, E. T., Seltzer, M. M., Floyd, F., Greenberg, J., Orsmond, G., & Bolt, D. 
(2010). The relative risk and timing of divorce in families of children with an autism spectrum 
disorder. Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 449^457. 

Harvey, A. G. (2008). Insomnia, psychiatric disorders, and the transdiagnostic perspective. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 299-303. 

Harvey, A. G. (2011). Sleep and circadian functioning: Critical mechanisms in the mood disorders? 
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7, 8.1-8.23. 

Hasin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Ogbum, E., & Grant, B. F. (2007). Prevalence, correlates, disability, 
and comorbidity of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence in the United States: Results from 
the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Concerns. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 64, 830-842. 

Hay, D. F., Pawlby, S., Waters, C. S., Perra, O., & Sharp, D. (2010). Mothers’ antenatal depression 
and their children’s antisocial outcomes. Child Development, 81, 149-165. 

Hay, P. J., Sachdev, P. S., Cumming, S. S., & Smith, J. S. (1993). Treatment of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder by psychosurgery. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 87, 197-207. 

Heaton, P, & Wallace, G. L. (2004). Annotation: The savant syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 45, 899-911. 

Heiden, W., & Hafner, H. (2000). The epidemiology of onset and course of schizophrenia. European 
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 250, 292-303. 

Heiman, J. R. (2002). Psychologic treatments for female sexual dysfunction: Are they effective and 
do we need them? Archives of Sexual Behavior, 31, 445^1-50. 

Helmes, E., & Landmark, J. (2003). Subtypes of schizophrenia: A cluster analytic approach. 
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 48, 702-708. 

Henker, B., & Whalen, C. K. (1989). Hyperactivity and attention deficits. Special Issue: Children and 
their development: Knowledge base, research agenda, and social policy application. American 
Psychologist, 44, 216-223. 

Herbenick, D. (2009). Because it feels good: A woman’s guide to sexual pleasure and satisfaction. 
Emmaus, PA: Rodale Books. 

Herman-Jeglinska, A., Grabowska, A., & Dulko, S. (2002). Masculinity, femininity, and transsexual¬ 
ism. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 31, 527-534. 

Herpetz, S. C., Werth, U., Lukas, G., Qunaibi, M., Schuerkens, A., Kunert, H. J., . . . Sass, H. (2001). 
Emotion in criminal offenders with psychopathy and borderline personality disorder. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 58, 737-745. 

Hettema, J. M., Prescott, C. A., Myers, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2005). The structure 
of genetic and environmental risk factors for anxiety disorders in men and women. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 62, 182-189. 

Hicks, B. M., Krueger, R. F., Iacono, W. G., McGue, M., & Patrick, C. J. (2004). Family transmis¬ 
sion and heritability of externalizing disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 922-928. 

Hill, M. N., Han, H. R., Dennison, C. R., Kim, M. T., Roary, M. C., Blumenthal, R. S., . . . 
Post, W. S. (2003). Hypertension care and control in underserved urban African American men: 
Behavioral and physiologic outcomes at 36 months. American Journal of Hypertension, 16, 
906-913. 

Hines, M. (2004). Psychosexual development in individuals who have female pseudohermaphro¬ 
ditism. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 13, 641-656. 

Hinshaw, S. P., & Melnick, S. M. (1995). Peer relationship with boys with attention deficit hyperactiv¬ 
ity disorder with and without comorbid aggression. Development and Psychopathy, 7, 627-647. 

Hirschfeld, R. M. A. (2001). Antidepressants in the United States: Current status and future needs. 
In M. M. Weissman (Ed.), Treatment of depression: Bridging the 21st century (pp. 123-134). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 

Hoek, H. W., & van Hoeken, D. (2003). Review of the prevalence and incidence of eating disorders. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 34, 383-396. 

Hogan, B. E., & Linden, W. (2004). Anger response styles and blood pressure: At least don’t rumi¬ 
nate about it! Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 27, 38-49. 



366 References 


Hollon, S. D., Thase, M. E., & Markowitz, J. C. (2002). Treatment and prevention of depression. 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 3, 39-77. 

Hooley, J. M. (2007). Expressed emotion and relapse of psychopathology. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology, 3, 329-352. 

Hopper, K. Harrison, G., Janca, A., & Sartorius, N. (Eds.). (2007). Recovery from schizophrenia: 
An international perspective: A report from the WHO Collaborative Project, the international 
study of schizophrenia. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Hornstein, N. L., & Putnam, F. W. (1996). Abuse and the development of dissociative symptoms and 
dissociative identity disorder. In C. R. Pfeffer (Ed.), Severe stress and mental disturbance in 
children (pp. 449^-73). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 

Houghton, S., Saxon, D., Bradbum, M., Ricketts, T., & Hardy, G. (2010). The effectiveness of rou¬ 
tinely delivered cognitive behavioural therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A bench¬ 
marking study. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 49, 473^4-89. 

Houts, A. C. (2005). Behavioral and functional models of OCD. In J. S. Abramowitz & A. C. Houts 
(Eds.), Concepts and controversies in obsessive-compulsive disorder (pp. 73-86). New York, 
NY: Springer. 

Howell, R. T., Kern, M. L., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2007). Health benefits: Meta-analytically deter¬ 
mining the impact of well-being on objective health outcomes. Health Psychology Review, 1, 
83-136. 

Hsu, L. K. (1996). Epidemiology of the eating disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 19: 
681-700. 

Hsu, L. K. G., Crisp, A. H., & Callender, J. S. (1992). Recovery in anorexia nervosa: The patient’s 
perspective. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 11, 341-350. 

Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope, H. G., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The prevalence and correlates of 
eating disorders in the national comorbidity survey replication. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 
348-358. 

Hudziak, J. J., van Beijsterveldt, C. E. M., Althoff, R. R., Stanger, C., Rettew, D. C., Nelson, 
E. C., . . . Boomsma, D. I. (2004). Genetic and environmental contributions to the child behav¬ 
ior checklist obsessive-compulsive scale: A cross-cultural twin study. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 61, 608-616. 

Hurwitz, T. A. (2004). Somatization and conversion disorder. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 49, 
172-178. 

Husain, S. S., Kevan, I. M., Linnell, R., & Scott, A. I. F. (2004). Electroconvulsive therapy in depres¬ 
sive illness that has not responded to drug treatment. Journal of Affective Disorders, 83, 
121-126. 

Hussong, A. M., Hicks, R. E., Levy, S. A., & Curran, P. J. (2001). Specifying the relations between 
affect and heavy alcohol use among young adults. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 
449^161. 

Iwamasa, G. Y. (1993). Asian Americans and cognitive-behavioral therapy. The Behavior Therapist, 
16, 233-235. 

Jacobi, C., Hayward, C., de Zwaan, M., Kraemer, H. C., & Agras, W. S. (2004). Coming to terms 
with risk factors for eating disorders: Application of risk terminology and suggestions for a 
general taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 19-65. 

James, D. (1998). Multiple personality disorder in the courts: A review of the North American expe¬ 
rience. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry, 9, 339-361. 

Janicak, P. G., Keck, P. E., Davis, J. M., Kasckow, J. W., Tugrul, K., Dowd, S. M., . . . Strakowski, 
S. M. (2001). A double-blind, randomized, prospective evaluation of the efficacy and safety of 
risperidone versus haloperidol in the treatment of schizoaffective disorder. Journal of Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 21, 360-368. 

Jimenez-Genchi, A., Avila-Rodrfguez, V. M., Sanchez-Rojas, F., Terrez, B. E., & Nenclares- 
Portocarrero, A. (2009). Sleep paralysis in adolescents: The “a dead body climbed on top of 
me” phenomenon in Mexico. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 63, 546-549. 



References 367 


Johns, L. C., Rossell, S., Frith, C., Ahmad, F., Hemsley, D., Kuipers, E., & McGuire, P. K. (2001). 
Verbal self-monitoring and auditory verbal hallucinations in patients with schizophrenia. 
Psychological Medicine, 31, 705-715. 

Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Brown, J., Smailes, E. M., & Bernstein, D. P. (1999). Childhood mal¬ 
treatment increases risk for personality disorders during early childhood. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 56, 600-606. 

Johnson, S. L., & Kizer, A. (2002). Bipolar and unipolar depression: A comparison of clinical phe¬ 
nomenology and psychosocial predictors. In I. H. Gotlib and C. L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook 
of depression (pp. 141-165). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Johnson, S. L., & Roberts, J. E. (1995). Life events and bipolar disorder: Implications from biologi¬ 
cal theories. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 434-449. 

Joiner, T., Coyne, J. C., & Blalock, J. (1999). On the interpersonal nature of depression: Overview 
and synthesis. In T. Joiner & J. C. Coyne (Eds.), The interactional nature of depression (pp. 
3-20). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Jones, S. (2004). Psychotherapy of bipolar disorder: A review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 80, 101-114. 

Jordan, J., Joyce, P. R., Carter, F. A., Horn, J., McIntosh, V., Luty, S. E., . . . Bulik, C. M. (2008). 
Specific and nonspecific comorbidity in anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 41, 47-56. 

Kabot, S. Masi, W., & Segal, M. (2003). Advances in the diagnosis and treatment of autism spectrum 
disorders. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 34, 26-33. 

Kaehler, L. A., & Freyd, J. J. (2009). Borderline personality characteristics: A betrayal trauma 
approach. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 1, 261-268. 

Kafka, M. P, & Hennen, J. (2002). A DSM-IV Axis I comorbidity study of males (n = 120) with 
paraphilias and paraphilia-related disorders. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and 
Treatment, 14, 349-366. 

Kahler, C. W., Read, J. P, Stuart, G. L., Ramsey, S. E., McCrady, B. S., & Brown, R. A. (2004). 
Motivational enhancement for 12-step involvement among patients undergoing alcohol detoxi¬ 
fication. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 736-741. 

Kane, J. M. (1996). Treatment-resistant schizophrenic patients. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 57 
(Suppl. 9), 35—40. 

Kane, J. M. (2004). Tardive dyskinesia rates with atypical antipsychotics in adults: Prevalence and 
incidence. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 16-20. 

Kanner, L. (1943). Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nervous Child, 2, 217-250. 

Kanner, L. (1973). Follow-up of eleven autistic children originally reported in 1943. In L. Kanner 
(Ed.), Childhood psychosis: Initial studies and new insights. Washington, DC: Winston/Wiley. 

Karvonen, J. T., Veijola, J., Jokelainen, J., Laksy, K., Jarvelin, M. R., & Joukamaa, M. (2004). 
Somatization disorder in young adult population. General Hospital Psychiatry, 26, 9-12. 

Kasen, S., Cohen, P, Skodol., A. E., Johnson, J. G., Smailes, E., & Brook, J. S. (2001). Childhood 
depression and adult personality disorder: Alternative pathways of continuity. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 58, 231-236. 

Katzman, D. K. (2005). Medical complications in adolescents with anorexia nervosa: A review of the 
literature. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37, S52-S59. 

Kaye, W. (2008). Neurobiology of anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Physiology & Behavior, 94, 121-135. 

Kaye, W. H., Strober, M., & Rhodes, L. (2002). Body image disturbance and other core symptoms in 
anorexia and bulimia nervosa. In D. J. Castle & K. A. Phillips (Eds.), Disorders of body image 
(pp. 67-82). Petersfield, England: Wrightson Biomedical Publishing. 

Kazdin, A. E., & Whitley, M. K. (2006a). Pretreatment social relations, therapeutic alliance, and 
improvements in parenting practices in parent management training. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 74, 346-355. 

Kazdin, A. E., & Whitley, M. K. (2006b). Comorbidity, case complexity, and effects of evidence- 
based treatment for children referred for disruptive behavior. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 74, 455—467. 



368 References 


Keane, T. M., Fisher, L. M., Krinsley, K. E., & Niles, B. L. (1994). Posttraumatic stress disorder. 
In M. Hersen & R. T. Ammerman (Eds.), Handbook of prescriptive treatments for adults (pp. 
237-260). New York, NY: Plenum. 

Keane, T. M., Marshall, A. D., & Taft, C. T. (2006). Posttraumatic stress disorder: Etiology, epidemi¬ 
ology, and treatment outcome. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology , 2, 161-197. 

Kelly, J. F., Magill, M., & Stout, R. L. (2009). How do people recover from alcohol depend¬ 
ence? A systematic review of the research on mechanisms of behavior change in Alcoholics 
Anonymous. Addiction Research and Theory, 17, 236-259. 

Kelly, M. P, Strassberg, D. S., & Turner, C. M. (2004). Communication and associated relationship 
issues in female anorgasmia. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 30, 263-276. 

Kent, L. (2004). Recent advances in the genetics of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Current 
Psychiatry Reports, 6, 143-148. 

Kernberg, O. F. (1985). Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. Northvale, NJ: Jason 
Aronson. 

Kessler, S., & McKenna, W. (2000). Who put the “trans” in transgender? Gender theory and every¬ 
day life. International Journal of Transgenderism, 4(3). Retrieved from http://www.sypmpo- 
sium.com/ijt/gilbert/ kessler.htm. 

Kessler, R. C., Merikangas, K. R., & Wang, P. S. (2007). Prevalence, comorbidity, and service uti¬ 
lization for mood disorders in the United States at the beginning of the twenty-first century. 
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 137-158. 

Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., Nelson, D. B., & Breslau, N. (1999). 
Epidemiological risk factors for trauma and PTSD. In R. Yehuda (Ed.), Risk factors for post¬ 
traumatic stress disorder (pp. 23-59). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 

Khan, A. A., Jacobson, K. C., Gardner, C. O., Prescott, C. A., & Kendler, K. S. (2005). Personality 
and comorbidity of common psychiatric disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 
190-196. 

Kiehl, K. A., Bates, A. T., Laurens, K. R., Hare, R. D., & Liddle, P. F. (2006). Brain potentials impli¬ 
cate temporal lobe abnormalities in criminal psychopaths. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
115, 443-453. 

Kihlstrom, J. F. (2005). Dissociative disorders. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 227-253. 

Kilpatrick, D. G., & Acierno, R. (2003). Mental health needs of crime victims: Epidemiology and 
outcomes. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16, 119-132. 

Kim, B. S. K. (2007). Adherence to Asian and European American cultural values and attitudes 
toward seeking professional psychological help among Asian American college students. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54, 474-480. 

Kim, C., Koo, M., & Kim, E. (2010). The biological treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. 
Clinical Psychopharmacology and Neuroscience, 8, 55-62. 

Kim, M. T., Han, H. R., Hill, M. N., Rose, L., & Roary, M. (2003). Depression, substance use, 
adherence behaviors, and blood pressure in urban hypertensive black men. Annals of 
Behavioral Medicine, 26, 24-31. 

Kim-Cohen, J., Caspi, A., Taylor, A., Williams, B., Newcombe, R., Craig, I. W., & Moffitt, T. E. 
(2006). MAOA, maltreatment, and gene-environment interaction predicting children’s mental 
health: New evidence and a meta-analysis. Molecular Psychiatry, 11, 903-913. 

Kinderman, P. (2001). Changing causal attributions. In P. W. Corrigan & D. L. Penn (Eds.), Social 
cognition and schizophrenia (pp. 195-215). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 

King, S. M., Keyes, M., Malone, S. M., Elkins, I., Legrand, L. N., Iacono, W. G., & McGue, M. 
(2009). Parental alcohol dependence and the transmission of adolescent behavioral disinhibi- 
tion: A study of adoptive and non-adoptive families. Addiction, 104, 578-586. 

Kingston, D. A., Seto, M. C., Firestone, P, & Bradford, J. M. (2010). Comparing indicators of sexual 
sadism as predictors of recidivism among adult male sexual offenders. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 78, 574-584. 



References 369 


Kirmayer, L. J. (2009). Nightmares, neurophenomenology and the cultural logic of trauma. Culture, 
Medicine and Psychiatry, 33, 323-331. 

Kirmayer, L. J., Groleau, D., Looper, K. J., & Dao, M. D. (2004). Explaining medically unexplained 
symptoms. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 49, 663-672. 

Kirmayer, L. J., & Young, A. (1998). Culture and somatization: Clinical, epidemiological, and ethno¬ 
graphic perspectives. Psychosomatic Medicine, 60, 420^-30. 

Kjeldsen, S. E., Knudsen, K., Ekrem, G., Fure, T. O., Movinckel, P., & Erikssen, J. E. (2006). Is 
there an association between severe job strain, transient rise in blood pressure and increased 
mortality? Blood Pressure, 15, 93-199. 

Kleifield, E. I., Wagner, S., & Halmi, K. A. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of anorexia ner¬ 
vosa. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 19, 715-737. 

Klein, D. A., & Walsh, B. T. (2004). Eating disorders: Clinical features and pathophysiology. 
Physiology & Behavior, 81, 359-374. 

Kliem, S., Kroger, C., & Kosfelder, J. (2010). Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality 
disorder: A meta-analysis using mixed-effects modeling. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 78, 936-951. 

Klin, A. (2009). Embracing the challenge of bold theories of autism. British Journal of Psychology, 
100, 29-32. 

Klin, A., Lin, D. J., Gorrindo, P., Ramsay, G., & Jones, W. (2009). Two-year-olds with autism orient 
to non-social contingencies rather than biological motion. Nature, 459, 257-263. 

Klonsky, E. D., Oltmanns, T. F., Turkheimer, E., & Fiedler, E. R. (2000). Recollections of conflict 
with parents and family support in the personality disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 
14, 327-338. 

Kluft, R. R (1995). The confirmation and disconfirmation of memories of abuse in DID patients: A 
naturalistic clinical study. Dissociation: Progress in the Dissociative Disorders, 8, 253-258. 

Klump, K. L., Suisman, J. L., Burt, S. A., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. G. (2009). Genetic and environ¬ 
mental influences on disordered eating: An adoption study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
118, 797-805. 

Knox, S., Burkard, A. W., Johnson, A. J., Suzuki, L. A., & Ponterotto, J. G. (2003). African 
American and European American therapists’ experiences of addressing race in cross-racial 
psychotherapy dyads. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 50, 466-481. 

Kolko, D. J., & Pardini, D. A. (2010). ODD dimensions, ADHD, and callous-unemotional traits 
as predictors of treatment response in children with disruptive behavior disorders. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 119, 713-725. 

Kong, L. L., Allen, J. B., & Glisky, E. L. (2008). Interidentity memory transfer in dissociative iden¬ 
tity disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 686-692. 

Kopelowicz, A., Liberman, R. R, Mintz, J., & Zarate, R. (1997). Comparison of efficacy of social 
skills training for deficit and nondeficit negative symptoms in schizophrenia. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 154, 424-425. 

Kraepelin, E. (1971). Dementia praecox and paraphrenia (R. M. Barclay, Trans.). Huntington, NY: 
Krieger. (Originally published 1919.) 

Krakow, B., & Zadra, A. (2006). Clinical management of chronic nightmares: Imagery rehearsal 
therapy. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 4, 45-70. 

Kratochvil, C. J., Greenhill, L. L., March, J. S., Burke, W. J., & Vaughan, B. S. (2004). The role of 
stimulants in the treatment of preschool children with of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
CNS Drugs, 18, 957-966. 

Kringlen, E. (1970). Natural history of obsessional neurosis. Seminars in Psychiatry, 2, 403^119. 

Kroenke, K., Sharpe, M., & Sykes, R. (2007). Revising the classification of somatoform disorders: 
Key questions and preliminary recommendations. Psychosomatics, 48, 277-285. 

Kroenke, K., West, S. L., Gilsenan, A., Eckert, G. J., Dolor, R., Stang, R,. . . Weinberger, M. (2001). 
Similar effectiveness of paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline in primary care: A randomized 
trial. Journal of the Americal Medical Association, 286, 2947-2955. 



370 References 


Krueger, R. B., & Kaplan, M. S. (1997). Frotteurism: Assessment and treatment. In D. R. Laws & W. 
O’Donohue (Eds.), Sexual Deviance. New York, NY: Guilford. 

Krueger, R. F., & Eaton, N. R. (2010). Personality traits and the classification of mental disorders: 
Toward a more complete integration in DSM-5 and an empirical model of psychopathology. 
Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 1, 97-118. 

Kushner, M. G., Abrams, K., & Borchardt, C. (2000). The relationship between anxiety disorders 
and alcohol use disorders: A review of major perspectives and findings. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 20, 149-171. 

Kuwert, P., Klauer, T., Eichhorn, S., Grundke, E., Dudeck, M., Schomerus, G., & Freyberger, 
H. J. (2010). Trauma and current posttraumatic stress symptoms in elderly German women 
who experienced wartime rapes in 1945. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 198, 
450-451. 

Ladwig, K. H., Marten-Mittag, B., Erazo, N., & Giindel, H. (2001). Identifying somatization disor¬ 
der in a population-based health examination survey: Psychosocial burden and gender differ¬ 
ences. Psychosomatics, 42, 511-518. 

Lahey, B. B., Schwab-Stone, M., Goodman, S. H., Waldman, I. D., Canino, G., Rathouz, 
P. J., . . . Jensen, P. S. (2000). Age and gender differences in oppositional behavior and conduct 
problems: A cross-sectional household study of middle childhood and adolescence. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 109, 488-503. 

Landhuis, C. E., Poulton, R., Welch, D., & Hancox, R. J. (2007). Does childhood television view¬ 
ing lead to attention problems in adolescence? Results from a prospective longitudinal study. 
Pediatrics, 120, 532-537. 

Langstrom, N., & Seto, M. C. (2006). Exhibitionistic and voyeuristic behavior in a Swedish national 
population survey. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35, 427-435. 

Larkin, K. T., & Zayfert, C. (2004). Anger expression and essential hypertension: Behavioral 
response to confrontation. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 56, 113-118. 

Laroi, F., & Woodward, T. S. (2007). Hallucinations from a cognitive perspective. Harvard Review of 
Psychiatry, 15, 109-117. 

Lau, J. Y. F., & Eley, T. C. (2010). The genetics of mood disorders. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology, 6, 313-337. 

Laumann, E. O., Gagnon, J. H., Michael, R. T., & Michaels, S. (1994). The social organization of 
sexuality: Sexual practices in the United States. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Lavigne, J. V., LeBailly, S. A., Hopkins, J., Gouze, K. R., & Binns, H. J. (2009). The prevalence 
of ADHD, ODD, depression, and anxiety in a community sample of 4-year-olds. Journal of 
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 38, 315-328. 

Lawler, C. P., Croen, L. A., Grether, J. K., & Van de Water, J. (2004). Identifying environmental con¬ 
tributions to autism: Provocative clues and false leads. Mental Retardation and Developmental 
Disabilities Research Reviews, 10, 292-302. 

Lee, J. K. P, Jackson, H. J., Pattison, R, & Ward, T. (2002). Developmental risk factors for sexual 
offending. Child Abuse & Neglect, 26, 73-92. 

Leekam, S. R., Prior, M. R., & Uljarevic, M. (2011). Restricted and repetitive behaviors in the 
autism spectrum disorders: A review of research in the last decade. Psychological Bulletin. 
Advance online publication. 

LeFever, G. B., Dawson, K. V., & Morrow, A. L. (1999). The extent of drug therapy for attention 
deficit-hyperactivity disorder among children in public schools. American Journal of Public 
Health, 89, 1359-1364. 

Lehman, B. J., Taylor, S. E., Kiefe, C. I., & Seeman, T. E. (2009). Relationship of early life stress 
and psychological functioning to blood pressure in the CARDIA study. Health Psychology, 28, 
338-346. 

Le Grange, D., Lock, J., Loeb, K., & Nicholls, D. (2010). Academy for Eating Disorders position paper: 
The role of the family in eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 43, 1-5. 



References 371 


Leibbrand, R., Hiller, W., & Fichter, M. M. (2000). Hypochondriasis and somatization: Two distinct 
aspects of somatoform disorders? Journal of Clinical Psychology, 56, 63-72. 

Leiknes, K. A., Finset, A., Mourn, T., & Sandanger, I. (2007). Current somatoform disorders in 
Norway: Prevalence, risk factors and comorbidity with anxiety, depression and musculoskeletal 
disorders. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 42, 698-710. 

Lejuez, C. W., Hopko, D. R., Acierno, R., Daughters, S. B., & Pagoto, S. L. (2011). Ten year revision 
of the brief behavioral activation treatment for depression: Revised treatment manual. Behavior 
Modification, 35, 111-161. 

Lenzenweger, M. F. (2008). Epidemiology of personality disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North 
America, 31, 395-403. 

Leonard, L. M., & Follette, V. M. (2002). Sexual functioning in women reporting a history of child 
sexual abuse: Review of the empirical literature and clinical implications. Annual Review of Sex 
Research, 13, 346-388. 

Letourneau, E. J., & O’Donohue, W. (1997). Classical conditioning of female sexual arousal. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 26, 63-78. 

Leue, A., Borchard, B., & Hoyer, J. (2004). Mental disorders in a forensic sample of sexual offend¬ 
ers. European Psychiatry, 19, 123-130. 

Lev, A. I. (2005). Disordering gender identity: Gender identity disorder in the DSM-IV-TR. Journal 
of Psychology & Human Sexuality, 17, 35-69. 

LeVay, S., & Valente, S. M. (2003). Human sexuality. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. 

Levin, R., & Nielsen, T. A. (2007). Disturbed dreaming, posttraumatic stress disorder, and affect dis¬ 
tress: A review and neurocognitive model. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 482-528. 

Levin, R., & Nielsen, T. A. (2009). Nightmares, bad dreams, and emotion dysregulation: A review 
and new neurocognitive model of dreaming. Psychological Science, 18, 84-88. 

Levine, S. B. (1999). The newly revised standards of care for gender identity disorders. Journal of 
Sex Education and Therapy, 24, 117-127. 

Levinson, D. F., Umapathy, C., & Musthaq, M. (1999). Treatment of schizoaffective disorder and 
schizophrenia with mood symptoms. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1138—1148. 

Levy, K. N., Meehan, K. B., Kelly, K. M., Reynoso, J. S., Weber, M., Clarkin, J. F., & Kernberg, O. F. 
(2006). Change in attachment patterns and reflective function in a randomized control trial of 
transference-focused psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 74, 1027-1040. 

Lewins, F. (2002). Explaining stable partnerships among FTMs and MTFs: A significant difference? 
Journal of Sociology, 38, 76-88. 

Lewis, C. E. (2002). Impact of substance abuse and dependence on patients with schizophrenia. In 
J. G. Csemansky (Ed.), Schizophrenia: A new guide for clinicians (pp. 267-283). New York, 
NY: Marcel Dekker. 

Li, L. C., Kim, B. S. K., & O’Brien, K. M. (2007). An analogue study of the effects of Asian cultural 
values and counselor multicultural competence on counseling process. Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research, Practice, Training, 44, 90-95. 

Lidbeck, J. (2003). Group therapy for somatization disorders in primary care: Maintenance of 
treatment goals of short cognitive-behavioural treatment one-and-a-half year follow-up. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 107, 449-456. 

Lieb, K. Zanarini, M. C., Schmahl, C., Linehan, M. M., & Bohus, M. (2004). Borderline personality 
disorder. Lancet, 364, 453^-61. 

Lilienfeld, S. O., & Lynn, S. J. (2003). Dissociative identity disorder: Multiple personalities, multi¬ 
ple controversies. In S. O. Lilienfeld & S. J. Lynn (Eds), Science and pseudoscience in clinical 
psychology (pp. 109-142). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S. J., Kirsch, I., Chaves, J. F., Sarbin, T. R., & Powell, R. A. (1999). 
Dissociative identity disorder and the sociocognitive model: Recalling the lessons of the past. 
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 507-523. 



372 References 


Lindahl, K. M. (1998). Family process variables and children’s disruptive behavior problems. 
Journal of Family Psychology, 12, 420-436. 

Lindeman, G., Korlin, D., & Uddenberg, N. (1986). Long-term follow-up of “sex change” in 
13 male-to-female transsexuals. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 15, 187-210. 

Linden, W. (2003). Psychologic treatment for hypertension can be efficacious. Preventive 
Cardiology, 6, 48-53. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder: The dia¬ 
lectics of effective treatment. New York, NY: Guilford. 

Lion, J. R. (1978). Outpatient treatment of psychopaths. In W. H. Reid (Ed.), The psychopath: 
A comprehensive study of antisocial disorders and behaviors. New York, NY: Brunner/ 
Mazel. 

Lis, E., Greenfield, B., Henry, M., Guile, J. M., & Dougherty, G. (2007). Neuroimaging and genet¬ 
ics of borderline personality disorder: A review. Journal of Psychiatry and Neruoscience, 32, 
162-173. 

Litt, M. D., Kadden, R. M., Cooney, N. L., & Kabela, E. (2003). Coping skills and treatment out¬ 
comes in cognitive-behavioral and interactional group therapy for alcoholism. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 118-128. 

Littleton, H., & Henderson, C. E. (2009). If she is not a victim, does that mean she was not trau¬ 
matized?: Evaluation of predictors of PTSD symptomatology among college rape victims. 
Violence Against Women, 15, 148-167. 

Loewenstein, R. J. (2006). DID 101: A hands-on clinical guide to the stabilization phase of dissocia¬ 
tive identity disorder treatment. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 29, 305-332. 

Looper, K. J., Kirmayer, & L. J. (2002). Behavioral medicine approaches to somatoform disorders. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 810-827. 

LoPiccolo, J., & Stock, W. E. (1986). Treatment of sexual dysfunction. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 54, 158-167. 

Lorber, M. F. (2004). Psychophysiology of aggression, psychopathy, and conduct problems: A meta¬ 
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 531-552. 

Lord, C. E. (2010). Autism: From research to practice. American Psychologist, 65, 815-826. 

Losh, M., & Capps, L. (2006). Understanding of emotional experience in autism: Insights from the 
personal accounts of high-functioning children with autism. Developmental Psychology, 42, 
809-818. 

Lotter, V. (1978). Follow-up studies. In M. Rutter & E. Schopler (Eds.), Autism: A reappraisal of 
concepts and treatment. New York, NY: Plenum. 

Lovaas, O. I. (1987). Behavioral treatment and normal educational and intellectual functioning in 
young autistic children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55, 3-9. 

Lowe, M. R., Thomas, J., Safer, D. L., & Butryn, M. L. (2007). The relationship of weight suppres¬ 
sion and dietary restraint to binge eating in bulimia nervosa. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 40, 640-644. 

Luczak, S. E., Glatt, S. J., & Wall, T. L. (2006). Meta-analyses of ALDH2 and ADH1B with alcohol 
dependence in Asians. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 607-621. 

Luczak, S. E., Wall, T. L., Cook, T. A. R., Shea, S. H., & Carr, L. G. (2004). ALDH2 status and 
conduct disorder mediate the relationship between ethnicity and alcohol dependence in 
Chinese, Korean, and White American college students. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
113, 271-278. 

Lukoschek, P. (2003). African Americans’ beliefs and attitudes regarding hypertension and its 
treatment: A qualitative study. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 14, 
566-585. 

Lynam, D. R., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Loeber, R., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (2007). Longitudinal 
evidence that psychopathy scores in early adolescence predict adult psychopathy. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 116, 155-165. 



References 373 


Lynn, S. J., Fassler, O., Knox, J. A., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (2006). Dissociative identity disorder. In J. 
E. Fisher & W. T. O’Donohue (Eds.), Practitioner’s guide to evidence-based psychotherapy. 
(pp. 248-257). New York, NY: Springer. 

Lyons, M. J., True, W. R., Eisen, S. A., & Goldberg, J. (1995). Differential heritability of adult and 
juvenile traits. Archives of General Psychiatry , 52, 906-915. 

Macmillan, R., McMorris, B. J., & Kruttschnitt, C. (2004). Linked lives: Stability and change in 
maternal circumstances and trajectories of antisocial behavior in children. Child Development, 
75, 205-220. 

Mai F. (2004). Somatization disorder: A practical review. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 49, 
652-662. 

Maldonado, J. R., Butler, L. D., & Spiegel, D. (2002). Treatments for dissociative disorders. In R E. 
Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (2nd ed., pp. 463-496). 
London, England: Oxford University Press. 

Maletzky, B. M. (1997). Exhibitionism: Assessment and treatment. In D. R. Laws & W. O’Donohue 
(Eds.), Sexual deviance. New York, NY: Guilford. 

Manari, A. P., Preedy, V. R., & Peters, T. J. (2003). Nutritional intake of hazardous drinkers and 
dependent alcoholics in the UK. Addiction Biology, 8, 201-210. 

Mann, B. J., & MacKenzie, E. P. (1996). Pathways among marital functioning, parental behaviors, 
and child behavior problems in school-age boys. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 25, 
183-191. 

Mann, K. (2004). Pharmacotherapy of alcohol dependence: A review of the clinical data. CNS 
Drugs, 18, 485-504. 

Manschreck, T. C. (1992). Delusional disorders: Clinical concepts and diagnostic strategies. 
Psychiatric Annals, 22, 241-251. 

Marlatt, G. A. (1985). Controlled drinking: The controversy rages on. American Psychologist, 40, 
374-375. 

Marshall, W. L., Eccles, A., & Barbaree, H. E. (1991). The treatment of exhibitionism: A focus on 
sexual deviance versus cognitive and relationship factors. Behavior Research and Therapy, 29, 
129-135. 

Marshall, W. L., Jones, R., Ward, T., Johnston, P, & Barabee, H. E. (1991). Treatment outcomes with 
sex offenders. Clinical Psychology Review, 11, 465^-85. 

Marshall, W. L., Marshall, L. E., & Serran, G. A. (2006). Strategies in the treatment of paraphilias: A 
critical review. Annual Review of Sex Research, 17, 162-182. 

Masters, W. H., & Johnson, V. E. (1970). Human sexual inadequacy. Boston, MA: Little, Brown. 

Mathews, A., & MacLeod, C. (2005). Cognitive vulnerability to emotional disorders. Annual Review 
of Clinical Psychology, 1, 167-195. 

Matthys, W., van Goozen, S. H. M., Snoek, H., & van Engeland, H. (2004). Response perseveration 
and sensitivity to reward and punishment in boys with oppositional defiant disorder. European 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 13, 362-364. 

Maughan, B., Rowe, R., Messer, J., Goodman, R., & Meltzer, H. (2004). Conduct disorder and oppo¬ 
sitional defiant disorder in a national sample: Developmental epidemiology. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 45, 609-621. 

Maughan, B., Taylor, A., Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T. E. (2004). Prenatal smoking and early childhood 
conduct problems. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 836-843. 

Mayes, S. D., & Calhoun, S. L. (2007). Learning, attention, writing, and processing speed in typical 
children and children with ADF1D, autism, anxiety, depression, and oppositional-defiant disor¬ 
der. Child Neuropsychology, 13, 469-493. 

Mazzeo, S. E., Mitchell, K. S., Bulik, C. M., Aggen, S. H., Kendler, K. S., & Neale, M. C. (2010). 
A twin study of specific bulimia nervosa symptoms. Psychological Medicine, 40, 1203-1213. 

Mazzucchelli, T., Kane, R., & Rees, C. (2009). Behavioral activation treatments for depression in 
adults: A meta-analysis and review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 16, 383-4-11. 



374 References 


McBride, P. A., Anderson, G. M., & Shapiro, T. (1996). Autism research: Bringing together 
approaches to pull apart the disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 980-983. 

McCabe, M. P. (2001). Evaluation of a cognitive behavior therapy program for people with sexual 
dysfunction. Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy, 27, 259-271. 

McCann, D., Barrett, A., Cooper, A., Crumpler, D., Dalen, L., Grimshaw, K., . . . Stevenson, 

J. (2007). Food additives and hyperactive behaviour in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children 
in the community: A randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. The Lancet, 370, 
1560-1567. 

McCart, M. R., Priester, P. E., Davies, W. H., & Azen, R. (2006). Differential effectiveness of behav¬ 
ioral parent-training and cognitive-behavioral therapy for antisocial youth: A meta-analysis. 
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 34, 527-543. 

McCarthy, B. W. (2004). An integrative cognitive-behavioral approach to understanding, assessing, 
and treating female sexual dysfunction. Journal of Family Psychotherapy, 15, 19-35. 

McConaghy, N. (1994). Sexual deviations. In M. Hersen & R. T. Ammerman (Eds.), Handbook of 
aggressive and destructive behavior in psychiatric patients. New York, NY: Plenum Press. 

McConaghy, N. (2005). Sexual dysfunctions and disorders. In J. E. Maddux & B. A. Winstead 
(Eds.), Psychopathology: Foundations for a contemporary understanding (pp. 225-280). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

McEachin, J. J., Smith, T., & Lovaas, O. I. (1993). Long-term outcome for children with autism who 
receive early intensive behavioral treatment. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 97, 
359-372. 

McEwen, B. S. (1998). Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 338, 171-179. 

McGee, R., & Feehan, M. (1991). Are girls with problems of attention underrecognized? Journal of 
Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 13, 187-198. 

McGuffin, R, Rijsdijk, F., Andrew, M., Sham, P., Katz, R., & Cardno, A. (2003). The heritability 
of bipolar affective disorder and the genetic relationship to unipolar depression. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 60, 497-502. 

McLean, P. D., Whittal, J. L., Thordarson, D. S., Taylor, S., Sochting, I., Koch, W. J., . . . Anderson, 

K. W. (2001). Cognitive versus behavior therapy in the group treatment of obsessive-compul¬ 
sive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 205-214. 

McMurran, M., Huband, N., & Overton, E. (2010). Non-completion of personality disorder treat¬ 
ments: A systematic review of correlates, consequences, and interventions. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 30, 277-287. 

McNally, R. J. (2003). Progress and controversy in the study of posttraumatic stress disorder. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 54, 229-252. 

Meehl, P. E. (1964). Manual for use with checklist of schizotypic signs. Unpublished manuscript, 
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis. 

Mehler, P. S. (2011). Medical complications of bulimia nervosa and their treatments. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 44, 95-104. 

Menza, M., Lauritano, M., Allen, L., Warman, M., Ostella, F., Hamer, R. M., & Escobar, J. (2001). 
Treatment of somatization disorder with nefazodone: A prospective, openlabel study. Annals of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 13, 153-158. 

Merritt, M. M., Bennett, G. G., Williams, R. B., Edwards, C. L., & Sobers, J. J. (2006). Perceived 
racism and cardiovascular reactivity and recovery to personally relevant stress. Health 
Psychology, 25, 364-369. 

Merskey, H. (2004). Somatization, hysteria, or incompletely explained symptoms? Canadian Journal 
of Psychiatry, 49, 649-651. 

Messerli, F. H., Williams, B., & Ritz, E. (2007). Essential hypertension. The Lancet, 370, 591-603. 

Messias, E. L., Chen, C., & Eaton, W. W. (2007). Epidemiology of schizophrenia: Review of find¬ 
ings and myths. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 30, 323-338. 



References 375 


Meyer, J. K., & Reter, D. J. (1979). Sex reassignment: Follow-up. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
36, 1010-1015. 

Meyer, W. J., Cole, C., & Emory, E. (1992). Depo provera treatment for sex offending behavior: 
An evaluation of outcome. Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 20, 
249-259. 

Michel, A., Ansseau, M., Legros, J. J., Pitchot, W., & Mormont, C. (2002). The transsexual: What 
about the future. European Psychiatry, 17, 353-362. 

Miklowitz, D. J. (2007). The role of the family in the course and treatment of bipolar disorder. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 192-196. 

Miklowitz, D. J., & Johnson, S. L. (2006). The psychopathology and treatment of bipolar disorder. 
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2, 199-235. 

Miklowitz, D. J., & Johnson, S. L. (2009). Social and familial factors in the course of bipolar disor¬ 
der: Basic processes and relevant interventions. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 16, 
281-296. 

Millberger, S., Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Chen, L., & Jones, J. (1996). Is maternal smoking dur¬ 
ing pregnancy a risk factor for attention deficit hyperactivity in children? American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 153, 1138-1142. 

Miller, M. B., Useda, J. D., Trull, T. J., Burr, R. M., & Minks-Brown, C. (2001). Paranoid, schizoid, 
and schizotypal personality disorders. In P. B. Sutker & H. E. Adams (Eds.), Comprehensive 
handbook of psychopathology (3rd ed., pp. 535-559.). New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/ 
Plenum. 

Mineka, S., & Zinbarg, R. (1995). Conditioning and ethological models of social phobia. In R. G. 
Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, 
assessment, and treatment (pp. 134-162). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Miric, D., Hallet-Mathieu, A. H., & Amar, G. (2005). Etiology of antisocial personality disorder: 
Benefits for society from an evolutionary standpoint. Medical Hypotheses, 65, 665-670. 

Miro, E., & Martinez, M. P. (2005). Affective and personality characteristics in function of night¬ 
mare prevalence, nightmare distress, and interference due to nightmares. Dreaming, 15, 
89-105. 

Mishra, B. R., Nizamie, S. H., Das, B., & Praharaj, S. K. (2009). Efficacy of repetitive transcra- 
nial magnetic stimulation in alcohol dependence: A sham-controlled study. Addiction, 105, 
49-55. 

Misra, M., Aggarwal, A., Miller, K. K., Almazan, C., Worley, M., Soyka, L. A., & Klibanski, A. 
(2004). Effects of anorexia nervosa on clinical, hematologic, biochemical, and bone density 
parameters in community-dwelling adolescent girls. Pediatrics, 114, 1574-1583. 

Mitchell, K. J., & Porteous, D. J. (2010). Rethinking the genetic architecture of schizophrenia. 
Psychological Medicine, 41, 19-32. 

Modestin, J. (1992). Multiple personality disorder in Switzerland. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
149, 88-92. 

Moffitt, T. E. (1993). Adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent antisocial behavior: A develop¬ 
mental taxonomy. Psychological Review, 100, 674-701. 

Moffitt, T. E., Harrington, H., Caspi. A., Kim-Cohen, J., Goldberg, D., Gregory, A. M., & Poulton, R. 
(2007). Depression and generalized anxiety disorder: Cumulative and sequential comorbidity 
in a birth cohort followed prospectively to age 32 years. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 
651-660. 

Molto, J., Poy, R., Segarra, P, Pastor, M. C., & Montanes, S. (2007). Response perseveration in psy¬ 
chopaths: Interpersonal/affective or social deviance traits? Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
116, 632-637. 

Monahan, J. (2001). Major mental disorders and violence: Epidemiology and risk assessment. In 
G. Pinard & L. Pagani (Eds.), Clinical assessment of dangerousness: Empirical contributions 
(pp. 89-102). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 



376 References 


Monroe, S. M., & Harkness, K. L. (2005). Life stress, the “kindling” hypothesis, and the recur¬ 
rence of depression: Considerations from a life stress perspective. Psychological Review, 112, 
417-445. 

Monuteaux, M. C., Mick, E., Faraone, S. V., & Biederman, J. (2010). The influence of sex on the 
course and psychiatric correlates of ADHD from childhood to adolescence: A longitudinal 
study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51, 233-241. 

Moore, B. A., & Krakow, B. (2010). Imagery rehearsal therapy: An emerging treatment for posttrau- 
matic nightmares in veterans. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 
2, 232-238. 

Morey, L. C., & Zanarini, M. C. (2000). Borderline personality: Traits and disorder. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 109, 733—737. 

Moritz, S., Kempke, S., Luyten, P., Randjbar, S., & Jelinek, L. (2011). Was Freud partly right on 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? Investigation of latent aggression in OCD. Psychiatry 
Research, 187, 180-184. 

Moss, A. C., & Albery, I. P. (2009). A dual-process model of the alcohol-behavior link for social 
drinking. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 516-530. 

MTA Cooperative Group. (1999). Moderators and mediators of treatment response for children with 
attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 1088-1096. 

Mufson, L., Dorta, K. P., Wickramaratne, P., Nomura, Y. I., Olfson, M., & Weissman, M. M. (2004). 
A randomized effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 577-584. 

Muhle, R., Trentacoste, S. V., & Rapin, I. (2004). The genetics of autism. Pediatrics, 113, 472^-86. 

Murphy, W. D. (1997). Exhibitionism: Psychopathology and theory. In D. R. Laws & W. O’Donohue 
(Eds.), Sexual deviance. New York, NY: Guilford. 

Myrick, H., & Anton, R. (2004). Recent advances in the pharmacotherapy of alcoholism. Current 
Psychiatry Reports, 6, 332-338. 

Narash-Eisikovits, O., Dierberger, A., & Westen, D. (2002). A multidimensional metaanalysis of 
pharmacotherapy for bulimia nervosa: Summarizing the range of outcomes in controlled clini¬ 
cal trials. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 10, 193—211. 

Nasrallah, H. A., Ketter, T. A., & Kalali, A. H. (2006). Carbamazepine and valproate for the treat¬ 
ment of bipolar disorder: A review of the literature. Journal of Affective Disorders, 95, 69-78. 

Nestor, P. G. (2002). Mental disorder and violence: Personality dimensions and clinical features. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 1973-1978. 

Newman, J. P., Patterson, C. M., & Kosson, D. S. (1987). Response perseveration in psychopaths. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 145-149. 

Newschaffer, C. J., Croen, L. A., Daniels, J., Giarelli, E., Grether, J. K., Levy, S. E., . . . Windham, 
J. C. (2007). The epidemiology of autism spectrum disorders. Annual Review of Public Health, 
28, 235-258. 

Nezu, A. M. (2010). Cultural influences on the process of conducting psychotherapy: Personal 
reflections of an ethnic minority psychologist. Psychotherapy Theory, Research, Practice, and 
Training, 47, 169-176. 

Nguyen, S. D. (1985). Mental health services for refugees and immigrants in Canada. In T. C. Owen 
(Ed.), Southeast Asian mental health: Treatment, prevention, services, training, and research 
(pp. 261-282). Washington, DC: National Institute of Mental Health. 

Nigg, J. T. (2001). Is ADHD an inhibitory disorder? Psychological Bulletin, 127, 571-598. 

Nigg, J. T., & Breslau, N. (2007). Prenatal smoking exposure, low birth weight, and disruptive 
behavior disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 
362-369. 

Nigg, J. T., Lohr, N. E., Westen, D., Gold, L. J., & Silk, K. R. (1992). Malevolent object representa¬ 
tions in borderline personality and major depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 
61-67. 



References 377 


Nigg, J. T., Nikolas, M., Knottnerus, G. M., Cavanagh, K., & Friderici, K. (2010). Confirmation 
and extension of association of blood lead with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) and ADHD symptom domains at population-typical exposure levels. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 51, 58-65. 

Nixon, R. D. V., Sweeney, L., Erickson, D. B., & Touyz, S. W. (2003). Parent-child interaction ther¬ 
apy: A comparison of standard and abbreviated treatments for oppositional defiant preschool¬ 
ers. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 251-260. 

Nock, M. K., Kazdin, A. E., Hiripi, E., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). Lifetime prevalence, correlates, and 
persistence of oppositional defiant disorder: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey 
Replication. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48, 703-713. 

Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2002). Sex differences in depression. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 

Nordin, V., & Gillberg, C. (1998). The long-term course of autistic disorders: Update on follow-up 
studies. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 97, 99-108. 

North, C. S., Thompson, S. J., Pollio, D. E., & Ricci, D. A. (1997). A diagnostic comparison of 
homeless and nonhomeless patients in an urban mental health clinic. Social Psychiatry and 
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 32, 236-240. 

Novaco, R. W., & Taylor, J. L. (2006). Anger. In A. Carr & M. McNulty (Eds.), The handbook of 
adult clinical psychology: An evidence-based practice approach (pp. 978-1009). New York, 
NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. 

Noyes, R., Stuart, S., Watson, D. B., & Langbehn, D. R. (2006). Distinguishing between hypo¬ 
chondriasis and somatization disorder: A review of the existing literature. Psychotherapy and 
Psychosomatics, 75, 270-281. 

Nunes, E. V., & Levin, F. R. (2004). Treatment of depression in patients with alcohol or other drug 
dependence: A meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association, 291, 1887-1896. 

Nurnberger, J. I., Wiegand, R., Bucholz, K., O’Connor, S., Meyer, E. T., Reich, T., . . . Porjesz, B. 
(2004). A family study of alcohol dependence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 1246-1256. 

Obasi, E. M., & Leong, F. T. L. (2009). Psychological distress, acculturation, and mental health¬ 
seeking attitudes among people of African descent in the United States: A preliminary investi¬ 
gation. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56, 227-238. 

Oberman, L. M., & Ramachandran, V. S. (2007). The simulating social mind: The role of the mirror 
neuron system and simulation in the social and communicative deficits of autism spectrum dis¬ 
orders. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 310-327. 

O’Brien, K. M., & Vincent, N. K. (2003). Psychiatric comorbidity in anorexia and bulimia nervosa: 
Nature, prevalence, and causal relationships. Clinical Psychology Review, 23, 57-74. 

Ogedegbe, G., Harrison, M., Robbins, L., Mancuso, C. A., & Allegrante, J. P. (2004). Barriers and 
facilitators of medication adherence in hypertensive African Americans: A qualitative study. 
Ethnicity and Disease, 14, 3-12. 

Ohayon, M. M. (2000). Prevalence of hallucinations and their pathological associations in the gen¬ 
eral population. Psychiatry Research, 97, 153-164. 

O’Leary, D. S., Flaum, M., Kesler, M. L., Flashman, L. A., Arndt, S., & Andreasen, N. C. (2000). 
Cognitive correlates of the negative, disorganized, and psychotic symptom dimensions of 
schizophrenia. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 12, 4-14. 

Ome, M. T., Dinges, D. F., & Orne, E. C. (1984). On the differential diagnosis of multiple person¬ 
ality in the forensic case. International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 32, 
118-169. 

Osborn, I. (1998). Tormenting thoughts and secret rituals. New York, NY: Dell Publishing. 

Osterman, J. E., Erdos, B. Z., Oldham, M., & Ivkovic, A. (2011). Antidepressant treatments in 
PTSD. In D. A. Ciraulo & R. Shader (Eds.), Pharmacotherapy of depression (2nd ed., pp. 275- 
307). New York, NY: Springer Science + Business Media. 

Ozer, E. J., & Weiss, D. S. (2004). Who develops posttraumatic stress disorder? Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 4, 169-172. 



378 References 


Palermo, M. T., & Curatolo, P. (2004). Pharmacologic treatment of autism. Journal of Child 
Neurology, 19, 155-164. 

Paradis, C., Friedman, S., & Hatch, M. (1997). Isolated sleep paralysis in African Americans with 
panic disorder. Cultural Diversity and Mental Health, 3, 69-76. 

Paradis, C., Friedman, S., Hinton, D. E., McNally, R. J., Solomon, L. Z., & Lyons, K. A. (2009). 
The assessment of the phenomenology of sleep paralysis: The Unusual Sleep Experiences 
Questionnaire (USEQ). CNS Neuroscience and Therapeutics, 15, 220-226. 

Paris, J. (2004). Personality disorders over time: Implications for psychotherapy. American Journal 
of Psychotherapy, 58, 420-429. 

Park, A., Sher, K. J., Todorov, A. A., & Heath, A. C. (2011). Interaction between the DRD4 VNTR 
polymorphism and proximal and distal environments in alcohol dependence during emerging 
and young adulthood. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. Advance online publication. 

Parker, S. K., Schwartz, B., Todd, J., & Pickering, L. K. (2004). Thimerosal-containing vaccines 
and autistic spectrum disorder: A critical review of published original data. Pediatrics, 114, 
793-804. 

Parmet, S., Glass, T. J., & Glass, R. M. (2004). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 292, 2040. 

Patrick, C. J., Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1993). Emotion in the criminal psychopath: Startle 
reflex modulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 82-92. 

Patterson, G. R. (1982). Coercive family process. Eugene, OR: Castalia. 

Paul, R. (1987). Communication. In D. J. Cohen, A. M. Donellan, & R. Paul (Eds.), Handbook of 
autism and pervasive developmental disorders (pp. 61-84). New York, NY: Wiley. 

Pauls, D. L., Alsobrook, J. R, Goodman, W., & Rasmussen, S. (1995). A family study of obsessive- 
compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 76-84. 

Pelham, W. E., McBumett, K., Harper, G. W., Milich, R., Murphy, D. A., Clinton, J., & Thiele, C. 
(1990). Methylphenidate and baseball playing in ADHD children: Who’s on first? Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 130-133. 

Perkins, D. O. (2002). Predictors of noncompliance in patients with schizophrenia. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 63, 1121-1128. 

Perkins, P. S., Klump, K. L., Iacono, W. G., & McGue, M. (2005). Personality traits in women with 
anorexia nervosa: Evidence for a treatment-seeking bias? International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 37, 32-37. 

Pescosolida, B. A., Monahan, J., Link, B., Stueve, A., & Kikuzawa, S. (1999). The public’s view 
of the competence, dangerousness, and need for legal coercion of persons with mental health 
problems. American Journal of Public Health, 89, 1339-1345. 

Peters, R. M., Butler, K., Gjini, K., Yeragani, V., & Boutros, N. N. (2011). The role of sensory gat¬ 
ing in the racism/blood pressure relationship: A pilot study. Journal of Psychophysiology, 25, 
40-49. 

Peterson, C. B., & Mitchell, J. E. (1999). Psychosocial and pharmacological treatment of eating dis¬ 
orders: A review of research findings. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 55, 685-697. 

Picchioni, D., & Hicks, R. A. (2009). Differences in the relationship between nightmares and coping 
with stress for Asians and Caucasians: A brief report. Dreaming, 19, 108-112. 

Pierce, E. W., Ewing, L. J., & Campbell, S. B. (1999). Diagnostic status and symptomatic behavior 
of hard-to-manage preschool children in middle childhood and early adolescence. Journal of 
Clinical Child Psychology, 28, 44-57. 

Pilling, S., Bebbington, P., Kuipers, E., Garety, R, Geddes, J., Martindale, B., . . . Morgan, C. (2002). 
Psychological treatments in schizophrenia: II. Metaanalyses of randomized controlled trials of 
social skills training and cognitive remediation. Psychological Medicine, 32, 783-791. 

Piper, A., & Merskey, H. (2004). The persistence of folly: A critical examination of dissociative iden¬ 
tity disorder. Part 1. The excesses of an improbable concept. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 
49, 592-600. 



References 379 


Piren J., Palmer, R, Jacobi, D., Childress, D., & Arndt, S. (1997). Broader autism phenotype: 
Evidence from a family history study of multiple-incidence autism families. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 154, 185-190. 

Pogue-Geile, M. F., & Gottesman, I. I. (2007). Schizophrenia: Study of a genetically complex phe¬ 
notype. In B. C. Jones & P. Mormede (Eds.), Neurobehavioral genetics: Methods and applica¬ 
tions. (2nd ed.), (pp. 209-226). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 

Polivy, J., & Herman, C. P. (2002). Causes of eating disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 
187-213. 

Polivy, J., Herman, C., & Boivin, M. (2008). Eating disorders. In J. E. Maddux & B. A. Winstead 
(Eds.), Psychopathology: Foundations for a contemporary understanding (2nd ed., pp. 251- 
279). New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. 

Pollard, T. M., & Schwartz, J. E. (2003). Are changes in blood pressure and total cholesterol related 
to changes in mood? An 18-month study of men and women. Health Psychology, 22, 47-53. 

Pope, H. G., Barry, S., Bodkin, A., & Hudson, J. I. (2006). Tracking scientific interest in the dis¬ 
sociative disorders: A study of scientific publication output 1984-2003. Psychotherapy and 
Psychosomatics, 75, 19-24. 

Poythress, N. G., Edens, J. F., Skeem, J. L., Lilienfeld, S. O., Douglas, K. S., Frick, P. J., . . . Wang, 
T. (2010). Identifying subtypes among offenders with antisocial personality disorder: A cluster- 
analytic study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 389^400. 

Putnam, F. W. (1989). Diagnosis and treatment of multiple personality disorder. New York, NY: Guilford. 

Putnam, F. W. (2006). Dissociative disorders. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental 
psychopathology (Vol. 3; pp. 657-695). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Quay, H. C. (1997). Inhibition and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Abnormal 
Child Psychology, 25, 7-13. 

Rabinowitz-Greenberg, S. R., Firestone, R, Bradford, J. M., & Greenberg, D. M. (2002). Prediction 
of recidivism in exhibitionists: Psychological phallometric, and offense factors. Sexual Abuse: 
A Journal of Research and Treatment, 14, 329-347. 

Raj, Y. P. (2004). Psychopharmacology of borderline personality disorder. Current Psychiatry 
Reports, 6, 225-231. 

Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1992). The epidemiology and clinical features of obsessive com¬ 
pulsive disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 15, 743-758. 

Remington, B., Hastings, R. P., Kovshoff, H., Espinosa, F. D., Jahr, E., Brown, T., . . . Ward, N. 
(2007). Early intensive behavioral intervention: Outcomes for children with autism and their 
parents after two years. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 112, 418—438. 

Riccardi, C. J., Timpano, K. R., & Schmidt, N. B. (2010). A case study perspective on the impor¬ 
tance of motivation in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Clinical Case Studies, 
9(4), 273-284. 

Rice, M. E., Harris, G. T., & Cormier, C. A. (1992). An evaluation of a maximum security thera¬ 
peutic community for psychopaths and other mentally disordered offenders. Law and Human 
Behavior, 16, 399^-12. 

Richman, L. S., Kubzansky, L., Maselko, J., Kawachi, I., Choo, P., & Bauer, M. (2005). Positive 
emotion and health: Going beyond the negative. Health Psychology, 24, 422-429. 

Rieber, R. (2006). The bifurcation of the self: The history and theory of dissociation and its disor¬ 
ders. New York, NY: Springer. 

Rief, W., Pilger, F., Ihle, D., Verkerk, R., Scharpe, S., & Maes, M. (2004). Psychobiological 
aspects of somatoform disorders: Contributions of monoaminergic transmitter systems. 
Neuropsychobiology, 49, 24-29. 

Robins, L. N., & Regier, D. A. (Eds.). (1991). Psychiatric disorders in America: The Epidemiologic 
Catchment Area Study. New York, NY: Free Press. 

Rodebaugh, T. L., Holaway, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2004). The treatment of social anxiety disor¬ 
der. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 883-908. 



380 References 


Rodrigo, C., Rajapakse, S., & Jayananda, G. (2010). The “antisocial” person: An insight into biol¬ 
ogy, classification and current evidence on treatment. Annals of General Psychiatry , 9, 31—43. 

Roelofs, K., & Spinhoven, P. (2007). Trauma and medically unexplained symptoms: Towards an 
integration of cognitive and neuro-biological accounts. Clinical Psychology Review , 27, 
798-820. 

Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 

Rogers, C. R. (2007). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality change. 
Psychotherapy : Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 44, 240-248. 

Room, R., Babor, T., & Rehm, J. (2005). Alcohol and public health. Lancet, 365, 519-530. 

Root, R. W., & Resnick, R. J. (2003). An update on the diagnosis and treatment of attention- 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 
34 , 34-41. 

Rosenbloom, M., Sullivan. E. V., & Pfefferbaum, A. (2003). Using magnetic resonance imaging and 
diffusion tensor imaging to assess brain damage in alcoholics. Alcohol Research and Health, 

27, 146-152. 

Ross, C. A. (1997). Dissociative identity disorder: Diagnosis, clinical features, and treatment of mul¬ 
tiple personality (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley. 

Ross, C. A. (2009). Errors of logic and scholarship concerning dissociative identity disorder. Journal 
of Child Sexual Abuse, 18, 221-231. 

Roth, W. T., Wilhelm, F. H., & Pettit, D. (2005). Are current theories of panic falsifiable? 
Psychological Bulletin, 131, 171-192. 

Rothbard, A. B., Schinnar, A. P, Hadley, T. P, Foley, K. A., & Kuno, E. (1998). Cost comparison of 
state hospital and community-based care for seriously mentally ill adults. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 155, 523-529. 

Rowe, R., Maughan, B., & Eley, T. C. (2006). Links between antisocial behavior and depressed 
mood: The role of life events and attributional style. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 
34, 293-302. 

Rowe, R., Maughan, B., Pickles, A., Costello, E. J., & Angold, A. (2002). The relationship between 
DSM-IV oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder: Findings from the Great Smoky 
Mountains Study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 43, 365-373. 

Roy-Byrne, P. P, Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., Bystritsky, A., Katon, W., . . . 
Sherbourne, C. D. (2005). A randomized effectiveness trial of cognitive-behavioral ther¬ 
apy and medication for primary care panic disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 
290-298. 

Rump, K. M., Giovannelli, J. L., Minshew, N. J., & Strauss, M. S. (2009). The development of emo¬ 
tion recognition in individuals with autism. Child Development, 80, 1434-1447. 

Russell, J. J., Moskowitz, D. S., Zuroff, D. C., Sookman, D., & Paris, J. (2007). Stability and vari¬ 
ability of affective experience and interpersonal behavior in borderline personality disorder. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116, 578-588. 

Saleh, F. M., & Berlin, F. S. (2003). Sexual deviancy: Diagnostic and neurobiological considerations. 
Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 12, 53-76. 

Saleh, F. M., Niel, T., & Fishman, M. J. (2004). Treatment of paraphilia in young adults with 
leuprolide acetate: A preliminary case report series. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 49, 
1343-1348. 

Salekin, R. T., Worley, C., & Grimes, R. D. (2010). Treatment of psychopathy: A review and brief 
introduction to the mental model approach for psychopathy. Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 

28, 235-266. 

Salkovskis, P. M. (1999). Understanding and treating obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 37, S29-S52. 

Salmon, P, Peters, S., & Stanley, I. (1999). Patients’ perceptions of medical explanations for somati- 
sation disorders: Qualitative analysis. British Medical Journal, 318, 372-376. 

Salmon, P, Skaife, K., & Rhodes, J. (2003). Abuse, dissociation, and somatization in irritable bowel 
syndrome: Towards an explanatory model. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 26, 1-18. 




References 381 


Sanislow, C. A., Grilo, C. M., & McGlashan, T. H. (2000). Factor analysis of the DSMIII-R bor¬ 
derline personality criteria in psychiatric inpatients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 757, 
1629-1633. 

Sansone, R. A., & Levitt, J. L. (2005). Borderline personality and eating disorders. Eating Disorders, 
13, 71-83. 

Sar, V. (2006). The scope of dissociative disorders: An international perspective. Psychiatric Clinics 
of North America, 29, 227-244. 

Sar, V., Akyuz, G., & Dogan, O. (2007). Prevalence of dissociative disorders among women in the 
general population. Psychiatry Research, 149, 169-176. 

Sartor, C. E., Lynskey, M. T., Bucholz, K. K., Madden, P. A. F., Martin, N. G., & Heath, A. C. 
(2009). Timing of first alcohol use and alcohol dependence: Evidence of common genetic influ¬ 
ences. Addiction, 104, 1512-1518. 

Saudino, K. J., & Plomin, R. (2007). Why are hyperactivity and academic achievement related? 
Child Development, 78, 972-986. 

Scherrer, J. F., Xian, H., Bucholz, K. K., Eisen, S. A., Lyons, M. J., Goldberg, J., . . . True, W. R. 
(2003). A twin study of depression symptoms, hypertension, and heart disease in middle-aged 
men. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 548-557. 

Schiffman, J., Abrahamson, A., Cannon, T., LaBrie, J., Parnas, J., Schulsinger, F., & Mednick, S. 
(2001). Early rearing factors in schizophrenia. International Journal of Mental Health, 30, 
3-16. 

Schlam, T. R., & Wilson, G. (2007). Relapse prevention for eating disorders. In K. A. Witkiewitz 
& G. Marlatt (Eds.), Therapist’s guide to evidence-based relapse prevention (pp. 169-190). 
San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press. 

Schneider, K. (1959). Clinical psychopathology. New York, NY: Grune and Stratton. 

Schreiber, F. (1973). Sybil. Chicago, IL: Henry Regnery. (Reprinted by Warner Paperback Library, 
New York, 1974) 

Schuckit, M. A., Smith, T. L., Danko, G. R, Bucholz, K. K., Reich, T., & Bierut, L. (2001). Five-year 
clinical course associated with DSM-IV alcohol abuse or dependence in a large group of men 
and women. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1084-1090. 

Schum, J. L., Jorgensen, R. S., Verhaeghen, R, Sauro, M., & Thibodeau, R. (2003). Trait anger, anger 
expression, and ambulatory blood pressure: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine, 26, 395-415. 

Segal, N. L. (2006). Two monozygotic twin pairs discordant for female-to-male transsexualism. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35, 347-358. 

Seivewright, H., Tyrer, P, & Johnson, T. (2002). Change in personality status in neurotic disorders. 
Lancet, 359, 2253-2254. 

Selby, E. A., Anestis, M. D. Bender, T. W., & Joiner, T. E. (2009). An exploration of the emotional 
cascade model in borderline personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118, 
375-387. 

Selby, E. A., Braithewaite, S. R., Joiner, T. E., & Fincham, F. A. (2008). Features of borderline per¬ 
sonality disorder, perceived childhood emotional invalidation, and dysfunction within current 
romantic relationships. Journal of Family Psychology, 22, 885-893. 

Seto, M. C., & Kuban, M. (1996). Criterion related validity of phallometric tests for paraphilic rape 
and sadism. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 175-183. 

Shaner, R.(2000). Benzodiazepines in psychiatric emergency settings. Psychiatric Annals, 30, 268-275. 

Shapiro, J. R., Berkman, N. D., Brownley, K. A., Sedway, J. A., Lohr, K. N., & Bulik, C. M. (2007). 
Bulimia nervosa treatment: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 40, 321-336. 

Shapiro, L. J., & Stewart, S. (2011). Pathological guilt: A persistent yet overlooked treatment factor 
in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 23, 63-70. 

Shattuck, P. T., & Grosse, S. T. (2007). Issues related to the diagnosis and treatment of autism spec¬ 
trum disorders. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 13, 
129-135. 



382 References 


Shea, V. (2004). A perspective on the research literature related to early intensive behavioral inter¬ 
vention (Lovaas) for young children with autism. Autism, 8, 349-367. 

Sher, K. J., Bartholow, B. D., Peuser, K., Erickson, D. J., & Wood, M. D. (2007). Stress-response- 
dampening effects of alcohol: Attention as a mediator and moderator. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 116, 362-377. 

Shi, L., & Nicol, J. (2007). Into the mind of a juvenile sex offender: A clinical analysis and rec¬ 
ommendation from an attachment perspective. The American Journal of Family Therapy, 35, 
395^102. 

Shoebridge, P. J., & Gowers, S. G. (2000). Parental high concern and adolescent-onset anorexia ner¬ 
vosa: A case-control study to investigate direction of causality. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
176, 132-137. 

Silberg, J. L., Rutter, M., Tracy, K., Maes, H. H., & Eaves, L. (2007). Etiological heterogeneity in 
the development of antisocial behavior: the Virginia Twin Study of Adolescent Behavioral 
Development and the Young Adult Follow-Up. Psychological Medicine, 37, 1193-1202. 

Simon, G. E., & Gureje, O. (1999). Stability of somatization disorder and somatization symptoms 
among primary care patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 90-95. 

Simon, G. E., VonKorff, M., Piccinelli, M., Fullerton, C., & Ormel, J. (1999). An international study 
of the relation between somatic symptoms and depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 
341, 1329-1335. 

Simon, N. M., & Pollack, M. H. (2000). The current status of the treatment of panic disorder: phar¬ 
macotherapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy. Psychiatric Annals, 30, 689-696. 

Simpson, G., Tate, R., Ferry, K., Hodgkinson, A., & Blaszczynski, A. (2001). Social, neuroradio¬ 
logic, medical, and neuropsychologic correlates of sexually aberrant behavior after traumatic 
brain injury: A controlled study. Journal of Head Trauma and Rehabilitation, 16, 556-572. 

Simpson, K. J. (2002). Anorexia nervosa and culture. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health 
Nursing, 9, 65-71. 

Sing, C. Y., & Wong, W. S. (2010). Prevalence of insomnia and its psychosocial correlates among 
college students in Hong Kong. Journal of American College Health, 59, 174-182. 

Skeem, J. L., Edens, J. F., Camp, J., & Colwell, L. H. (2004). Are there ethnic differences in levels of 
psychopathy? A meta-analysis. Law and Human Behavior, 28, 505-527. 

Skodol, A. E. (2005). Manifestations, clinical diagnosis, and comorbidity. In J. M. Oldham, A. E. 
Skodol, & D. S. Bender (Eds.), Textbook of personality disorders (pp. 57-88). Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Publishing. 

Skodol, A. E., & Bender, D. S. (2003). Why are women diagnosed borderline more than men? 
Psychiatric Quarterly, 74, 349-360. 

Skodol, A. E., Clark, L., Bender, D. S., Krueger, R. F., Morey, L. C., Verheul, R., . . . Oldham, J. 
M. (2011). Proposed changes in personality and personality disorder assessment and diagno¬ 
sis for DSM-5 Part I: Description and rationale. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and 
Treatment, 2, 4-22. 

Skoog, G., & Skoog, I. (1999). A 40-year follow-up of patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(2), 121-127. 

Smith, A. (2006). Cognitive empathy and emotional empathy in human behavior and evolution. The 
Psychological Record, 56, 3-21. 

Smith, C. A., & Farrington, D. P. (2004). Continuities in antisocial behavior and parenting across 
three generations. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45, 230-247. 

Smith, C. J., Lang, C. M., Kryzak, L., Reichenberg, A., Hollander, E., & Silverman, J. M. (2009). 
Familial associations of intense preoccupations, an empirical factor of the restricted, repetitive 
behaviors and interests domain of autism. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50, 
982-990. 

Smith, L. A., Cornelius, V., Warnock, A., Bell, A., & Young, A. H. (2007). Effectiveness of mood 
stabilizers and antipsychotics in the maintenance phase of bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders. 
9, 394^412. 



References 383 


Smith, L. D., & Peck, P. L. (2004). Dialectical behavior therapy: A review and call to research. 
Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 26, 25-38. 

Smith, Y. L. S., van Goozen, S. H. M., Kuiper, A. J., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2005). Sex reas¬ 
signment: Outcomes and predictors of treatment for adolescent and adult transsexuals. 
Psychological Medicine, 35, 89-99. 

Sobell, M. B., & Sobell, L. C. (1976). Second-year treatment outcome of alcoholics treated by indi¬ 
vidualized behavior therapy: Results. Behavior Research and Therapy, 14, 195-215. 

Sohn, M., & Bosinski, H. A. G. (2007). Gender identity disorders: Diagnostic and surgical aspects. 
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 4, 1193-1208. 

Somers, J. M., Goldner, E. M., Waraich, P, & Hsu, L. (2004). Prevalence studies of substance- 
related disorders: A systematic review of the literature. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 49, 
373-384. 

South, S. C., Oltmanns, T. F., & Krueger, R. F. (2011). The spectrum of personality disorders. In 

D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Oxford handbook of clinical psychology (pp. 345-389). New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press. 

Spiegel, D. (2001). Deconstructing the dissociative disorders: For whom the Dell tolls. Journal of 
Trauma and Dissociation, 2, 51-57. 

Spitzer, C., Barnow, S., Gau, K., Freyberger, H. J., & Grabe, H. J. (2008). Childhood maltreatment 
in patients with somatization disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 42, 
335-341. 

Sprague, R. L., Cohen, M., & Werry, J. S. (1974). Normative data on the Conners Teacher Rating 
Scale and Abbreviated Scale. Technical Report. Children’s Research Center, University of 
Illinois, Urbana. 

Staiger, P. K., Thomas, A. C., Ricciardelli, L. A., Mccabe, M. P, Cross, W., & Young, G. (2011). 
Improving services for individuals with a dual diagnosis: A qualitative study reporting on the 
views of service users. Addiction Research & Theory, 19, 47-55. 

Steadman, H. J., Mulvey, E. P, Monahan, J., Robbins, P. C., Appelbaum, P. S., Grisso, T., . . . Silver, 

E. (1998). Violence by people discharged from acute psychiatric inpatient facilities and by oth¬ 
ers in the same neighborhoods. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 393-401. 

Steiner, H., & Remsing, L. (2007). AACAP Official Action: Practice parameter for the assessment 
and treatment of children and adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 126-141. 

Steinhausen, H. (2002). The outcome of anorexia nervosa in the 20th century. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 159, 1284-1293. 

Steinhausen, H. C. (2009). The heterogeneity of causes and courses of attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 120, 392-399. 

Stephan, U., & Roesler, U. (2010). Health of entrepreneurs versus employees in a national represent¬ 
ative sample. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 83, 717-738. 

Stephens, J. H., Richard, P, & McHugh, P. R. (2000). Long-term follow-up of patients with a diag¬ 
nosis of paranoid state and hospitalized, 1913 to 1940. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
188, 202-208. 

Steptoe, A., & Willemsen, G. (2004). The influence of low job control on ambulatory blood pressure 
and perceived stress over the working day in men and women from the Whitehall II cohort. 
Journal of Hypertension, 22, 915-920. 

Stem, J., Murphy, M., & Bass, C. (1993). Personality disorders in patients with somatisation disor¬ 
der: A controlled study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 785-789. 

Stewart, J. C., Janicki, D. L., & Kamarck, T. W. (2006). Cardiovascular reactivity to and recov¬ 
ery from psychological challenge as predictors of 3-year change in blood pressure. Health 
Psychology, 25, 111-118. 

Stice, E., Marti, C. N., Shaw, H., & Jaconis, M. (2009). An 8-year longitudinal study of the natural 
history of threshold, subthreshold, and partial eating disorders from a community sample of 
adolescents. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118, 587-597. 



384 References 


Stock, W. (1993). Inhibited female orgasm. In W. O’Donohue, J. H. Geer, W. O’Donohue, J. H. Geer 
(Eds.), Handbook of sexual dysfunctions: Assessment and treatment (pp. 253-277). Needham 
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Stoller, R. J. (1985). Presentations of gender. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Stormshak, E. A., Bierman, K. L., McMahon, R. J., & Lengua, L. J. (2000). Parenting practices 
and child disruptive behavior problems in early elementary school. Journal of Clinical Child 
Psychology , 29, 17-29. 

Strober, M. (1997). Consultation and therapeutic engagement in severe anorexia nervosa. In D. M. 
Gamer & P. E. Garfinkel (Eds.), Handbook of treatment for eating disorders (2nd ed., pp. 229- 
247). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Stuart, H. L., & Arboleda-Florez, J. E. (2001). A public health perspective on violent offenses among 
persons with mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 52, 654-659. 

Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G. C., Bucceri, J. M., Holder, A. M. B., Nadal, K. L., & 
Esquilin, M. (2007). Racial microaggressions in everyday life: Implications for clinical prac¬ 
tice. American Psychologist, 62, 271-286. 

Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (1999). Counselling the culturally different. New York, NY: Wiley. 

Suen, L. K. P, Hon, L. K. E., & Tam, W. W. W. (2008). Association between sleep behavior and 
sleep-related factors among university students in Hong Kong. Chronobiology International, 
25, 760-775. 

Sugarman, P, Dumughn, C., Saad, K., Hinder, S., & Bluglass, S. (1994). Dangerousness in exhibi¬ 
tionists. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry, 5, 287-296. 

Sung, M., Fung, D. S. S., Cai, Y., & Ooi, Y. P. (2010). Pharmacological management in children 
and adolescents with pervasive developmental disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal 
of Psychiatry, 44, 410-428. 

Swanson, J., Estroff, S., Swartz, M., & Borum, R. (1997). Violence and severe mental disor¬ 
der in clinical and community populations: The effects of psychotic symptoms. Psychiatry: 
Interpersonal and Biological Processes, 60, 1-22. 

Swendsen, E. J., King, D. W., King, L. A., Wolfe, J., Erickson, D. J., & Stokes, L. R. (2000). Mood 
and alcohol consumption: An experience sampling test of the self-medication hypothesis. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 198-204. 

Sysko, R. R., Sha, N. N., Wang, Y. Y., Duan, N. N., & Walsh, B. T. (2010). Early response to antide¬ 
pressant treatment in bulimia nervosa. Psychological Medicine, 40, 999-1005. 

Szklo-Coxe, M., Young, T., Finn, L., & Mignot, E. (2007). Depression: Relationships to sleep 
paralysis and other sleep disturbances in a community sample. Journal of Sleep Research, 16, 
297-312. 

Tager-Flusberg, H. (2007). Evaluating the theory-of-mind hypothesis of autism. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 76, 311-315. 

Tan, Y., & Zhong, Y. (2001). Chinese style psychoanalysis—assessment and treatment of paraphilias: 
Exhibitionism, frotteurism, voyeurism, and fetishism. International Journal of Psychotherapy, 
6, 297-314. 

Tardiff, K. (2001). Axis II disorders and dangerousness. In G. Pinard & L. Pagani (Eds.), Clinical 
assessment of dangerousness: Empirical contributions (pp. 103-120). New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Taylor, E. (2009). Developing ADHD. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50, 126-132. 

Teplin, L. A., Abram, K. M., & McClelland, G. M. (1996). Prevalence of psychiatric disorders among 
incarcerated women: Pretrial jail detainees. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 505-512. 

Terao, T., & Nakamura, J. (2000). Exhibitionism and low-dose trazodone treatment. Human 
Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental, 15, 347-349. 

Thewissen, V., Bentall, R. P, Lecomte, T., van Os, J., & Myin-Germeys, I. (2008). Fluctuations in 
self-esteem and paranoia in the context of daily life. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 
143-153. 



References 385 


Thigpen, C. H., & Cleckley, H. M. (1957). The three faces of Eve. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 

Thomas, A. (2001). Factitious and malingered dissociative identity disorder: Clinical features 
observed in 18 cases. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation , 2, 59-77. 

Thomas, J. T., Vartanian, L. R., & Brownell, K. D. (2009). The relationship between eating disorder 
not otherwise specified (EDNOS) and officially recognized eating disorders: Meta-analysis and 
implications for DSM. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 407^4-33. 

Thomson, L. D. G., Bogue, J. P., Humphreys, M. S., & Johnstone, E. C. (2001). A survey of female 
patients in high security psychiatric care in Scotland. Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 
11, 86-93. 

Thornton, C., & Russell, J. (1997). Obsessive compulsive comorbidity in the dieting disorders. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 21, 83-87. 

Tiet, Q. O., & Mausbach, B. (2007). Treatments for patients with dual diagnosis: A review. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and experimental research, 31, 513-536. 

Timmer, B., Bleichhardt, G., & Rief, W. (2006). Importance of psychotherapy motivation in patients 
with somatization syndrome. Psychotherapy Research, 16, 348-356. 

Toates, F. (2009). An integrative theoretical framework for understanding sexual motivation, arousal, 
and behavior. Journal of Sex Research, 46, 168-193. 

Tolin, D. F., Hannan, S., Maltby, N., Diefenbach, G. J., Worhunsky, P., & Brady, R. E. (2007). A ran¬ 
domized controlled trial of self-directed versus therapist-directed cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
obsessive-compulsive disorder patients with prior medication trials. Behavior Therapy, 38, 179-191. 

Tolin, D. F., & Steketee, G. (2007). General issues in psychological treatment for obsessive-compul¬ 
sive disorder. In M. M. Antony, C. Purdon, & L. J. Summerfeldt (Eds.), Psychological treat¬ 
ment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: Fundamentals and beyond (pp. 31-59). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

Tomasson, K., Kent, D., & Coryell, W. (1991). Somatization and conversion disorders: Comorbidity 
and demographics at presentation. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 84, 288-293. 

Torres, A. R., Prince, M. J., Bebbington, P. E., Bhugra, D., Brugha, T. S., Farrell, M., . . . 
Singleton, N. (2006). Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Prevalence, comorbidity, impact, and 
help-seeking in the British National Psychiatric Morbidity survey of 2000. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 163, 1978-1985. 

Treasure, J. L. (2007). Getting beneath the phenotype of anorexia nervosa: The search for viable 
endophenotypes and genotypes. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 52, 212-219. 

Trull, T. J., Jahng, S., Tomko, R. L., Wood, P. K., & Sher, K. J. (2010). Revised NESARC personal¬ 
ity disorder diagnoses: Gender, prevalence, and comorbidity with substance dependence disor¬ 
ders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 24(4), 412-426. 

Tully, L. A., Arseneault, L., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., & Morgan, J. (2004). Does maternal warmth 
moderate the effects of birth weight on twins’ attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
symptoms and low IQ? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 218-226. 

Turk, C. L., & Mennin, D. S. (2011). Phenomenology of generalized anxiety disorder. Psychiatric 
Annals, 41, 72-78. 

Turner, M. S., & Stewart, D. W. (2006). Review of the evidence for the long-term efficacy of atypi¬ 
cal antipsychotic agents in the treatment of patients with schizophrenia and related psychoses. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 20, 20-37. 

Ullman, S. E., & Filipas, H. H. (2001). Predictors of PTSD symptom severity and social reactions in 
sexual assault victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 14, 369-389. 

Vaillant, G. E. (1996). A long-term follow-up of male alcohol abuse. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
53, 243-249. 

Vaillant, G. E. (2003). A 60-year follow-up of alcoholic men. Addiction, 98, 1043-1051. 

Van den Bergh, B. R. H., & Marcoen, A. (2004). High antenatal maternal anxiety is related to ADHD 
symptoms, externalizing problems, and anxiety in 8- and 9-year olds. Child Development, 75, 
1085-1097. 



386 References 


van den Oord, E. J., Boomsma, D. I., & Verhulst, F. C. (1994). A study of problem behaviors in 10- 
to 15-year old biologically related and unrelated international adoptees. Behavior Genetics, 24, 
193-205. 

van der Ham, T. (1997). Empirically based subgrouping of eating disorders in adolescents: A longi¬ 
tudinal perspective. British Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 363-368. 

van der Voort, T. Y. G., Gossens, P. J. J., & van der Bijl, J. J. (2007). Burden, coping and needs 
for support of caregivers for patients with a bipolar disorder: A systematic review. Journal of 
Psychiatry and Mental Health Nursing, 14, 679-687. 

van Hanswijck, J. P., van Furth, E. F., Lacey, J. H., & Waller, G. (2003). The prevalence of DSM-IV 
personality pathology among individuals with bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorder and obes¬ 
ity. Psychological Medicine, 33, 1311-1317. 

Veenstra, E. M., & de Jong, P. J. (2011). Reduced automatic motivational orientation towards food 
in restricting anorexia nervosa. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. Advanced online publication. 

Verster, J. C., & Volkerts, E. R. (2004). Clinical pharmacology, clinical efficacy, and behavioral tox¬ 
icity of alprazolam: A review of the literature. CNS Drug Reviews, 10, 45-76. 

Voeller, K. K. S. (2004). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Journal of Child 
Neurology, 19, 798-814. 

Volkmar, F. R., Chawarska, K., & Klin, A. (2005). Autism in infancy and early childhood. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 56, 315-336. 

Volkmar, F. R., Lord, C., Bailey, A., Schultz, R. T., & Klin, A. (2004). Autism and pervasive develop¬ 
mental disorders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45, 135-170. 

Wade, T. D., Bergin, J. L., Tiggemann, M., Bulik, C. M., & Fairbum, C. G. (2006). Prevalence and 
long-term course of lifetime eating disorders in an adult Australian twin cohort. Australian and 
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 121-128. 

Wakschlag, L. S., Briggs-Gowan, M. J., Carter, A. S., Hill, C., Danis, B., Keenan, K., . . . 
Leventhal, B. L. (2007). A developmental framework for distinguishing disruptive behav¬ 
ior from normative misbehavior in preschool children. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 48, 976-987. 

Wakschlag, L. S., Tolan, P. H., & Leventhal, B. L. (2010). “Ain't misbehavin’’: Towards a develop- 
mentally-specified nosology for preschool disruptive behavior. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 51, 3-22. 

Waldinger, M. D., Zwinderman, A. H., & Olivier, B. (2001). Antidepressants and ejaculation: A 
double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, fixed dose study with paroxetine, sertraline, and 
nefazodone. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 21, 293-297. 

Waldinger, R. J., & Gunderson, J. G. (1984). Completed psychotherapies with borderline patients. 
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 38, 190-202. 

Walker, E., Kestler, L., Bollini, A., & Hochman, K. M. (2004). Schizophrenia: Etiology and course. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 401-430. 

Walsh, E., Gilvarry, C., Samele, C., Harvey, K., Manley, C., Tattan, T., . . . Fahy, T. (2004). 
Predicting violence in schizophrenia: A prospective study. Schizophrenia Research, 67, 
247-252. 

Wang, J. L., & El-Guebaly, N. (2004). Sociodemographic factors associated with comorbid major 
depressive episodes and alcohol dependence in the general population. Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 49, 37-44. 

Waraich, R, Goldner, E. M., Somers, J. M., & Hsu, L. (2004). Prevalence and incidence studies of 
mood disorders: A systematic review of the literature. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 49, 
124-138. 

Warshaw, R. (1994). / never called it rape: The Ms. report on recognizing, fighting, and surviving 
acquaintance rape. New York, NY: Harper & Row. 

Watson, D. (2001). Dissociations of the night: Individual differences in sleep-related experiences and 
their relation to dissociation and schizotypy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 526-535. 

Wazana, A., Bresnahan, M., & Kline, J. (2007). The autism epidemic: Fact or artifact? Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 721-730. 



References 387 


Webster-Stratton, C., & Hammond, M. (1997). Treating children with early-onset conduct problems: 
A comparison of child and parent training interventions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 65, 93-109. 

Wegner, D. M. (1994). Ironic processes of mental control. Psychological Review, 101, 34-52. 

Wegner, D. M., Wenzlaff, R. M., & Kozak, M. (2004). Dream rebound: The return of suppressed 
thoughts in dreams. Psychological Science, 15, 232-236. 

Weiss, B., Tram, J. M., Weisz, J. R., Rescorla, L., & Achenbach, T. M. (2009). Differential symptom 
expression and somatization in Thai versus U. S. children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 77, 987-992. 

Weiss, M. D., & Salpekar, J. (2010). Sleep problems in the child with attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder: Defining aetiology and appropriate treatments. CNS Drugs, 24, 811-828. 

Weissman, M. M. (2007). Recent non-medication trials of interpersonal psychotherapy for depres¬ 
sion. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 10, 117-122. 

West, S. L., Vinikoor, L. C., & Zolnoun, D. (2004). A systematic review of the literature on female 
sexual dysfunction prevalence and predictors. Annual Review of Sex Research, 15, 40-172. 

Whalen, C. K., Henker, B., Buhrmester, D., Hinshaw, S. R, Huber, A., & Laski, K. (1989). Does 
stimulant medication improve the peer status of hyperactive children? Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 57, 545-549. 

White, C. N., Gunderson, J. G., Zanarini, M. C., & Hudson, J. I. (2003). Family studies of borderline 
personality disorder: A review. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 11, 8-19. 

Widiger, T. A., & Samuel, D. B. (2005). Evidence-based assessment of personality disorders. 
Psychological Assessment, 17, 278-287. 

Wiegel, M., Wincze, J. P., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Sexual dysfunction. In M. M. Antony & D. H. 
Barlow (Eds.), Handbook of assessment and treatment planning for psychological disorders 
(pp. 481-522). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Wilcox, D. T., & Sosnowski, D. E. (2005). Polygraph examination of British sexual offenders: A 
pilot study on sexual history disclosure testing. Journal of Sexual Aggression, 11, 3-25. 

Wilens, T. E., Faraone, S. V., Biederman, J., & Gunawardene, S. (2003). Does stimulant therapy of 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder beget later substance abuse? A meta-analytic review of 
the literature. Pediatrics, 111, 179-185. 

Williams, P. (2010). Psychotherapeutic treatment of Cluster A personality disorders. In J. F. Clarkin, 
P. Fonagy, & G. O. Gabbard (Eds.), Psychodynamic psychotherapy for personality disorders: A 
clinical handbook (pp. 165-185). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 

Williams, R. B., Barefoot, J. C., & Schneiderman, N. (2003). Psychosocial risk factors for cardio¬ 
vascular disease: More than one culprit at work. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
290, 2190-2192. 

Williamson, D. A., Cubic, B. A., & Gleaves, D. H. (1993). Equivalence of body image disturbance in 
anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 173-176. 

Willoughby, M. T. (2003). Developmental course of ADHD symptomatology during the transition 
from childhood to adolescence: A review with recommendations. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 44, 88-106. 

Wills, L., & Garcia, J. (2002). Parasomnias: Epidemiology and management. CNS Drugs, 16, 803-810. 

Wilson, G. T., Grilo, C. M., & Vitousek, K. M. (2007). Psychological treatment of eating disorders. 
American Psychologist, 62, 199-216. 

Wilson, G. T., & Sysko, R. (2006). Cognitive-behavioural therapy for adolescents with bulimia ner¬ 
vosa. European Eating Disorders Review, 14, 8-16. 

Wing, Y. K., Chiu, H., Leung, T., & Ng, J. (1999). Sleep paralysis in the elderly. Journal of Sleep 
Research, 8, 151-155. 

Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2007). Modeling the complexity of post-treatment drinking: It's a 
rocky road to relapse. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 724-738. 

Wonderlich, S. A., Brewerton, T. D., Jocic, Z., & Dansky, B. S. (1997). Relationship of childhood 
sexual abuse and eating disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 36, 1107-1115. 



388 References 


Woods, S. (2004). Untreated recovery from eating disorders. Adolescence, 39, 361-371. 

Woolfolk, R. L., & Allen, L. A. (2010). Affective-cognitive behavioral therapy for somatization dis¬ 
order. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 24, 116-131. 

Woolfolk, R. L., Allen, L. A., & Tiu, J. E. (2007). New directions in the treatment of somatization. 
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 30, 621-644. 

World Health Organization. (1990). International classification of diseases and related health care 
problems (10th ed.). Geneva, Switzerland. 

Wu, E. O., Birnbaum, H., Hudson, T., & Kessler, R. (2006). Annual prevalence of diagnosed 
schizophrenia in the USA: A claims data analysis approach. Psychological Medicine, 36, 
1535-1540. 

Yadin, E., & Foa, E. B. (2007). Cognitive behavioral treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder. In 
L. J. Kirmayer, R. Lemelson, & M. Barad (Eds.), Understanding trauma: Integrating biological, 
clinical, and cultural perspectives (pp. 178-193). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Yan, L. L., Liu, K., Matthews, K. A., Daviglus, M. L., Ferguson, T. F., & Kiefe, C. I. (2003). 
Psychosocial factors and risk of hypertension: The Coronary Artery Risk Development 
in Young Adults (CARDIA) Study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 290, 
2138-2148. 

Yeager, C. A., & Lewis, D. O. (1997). False memories of cult abuse. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 154, 435. 

Yoon, E., Langrehr, K., & Ong, L. Z. (2011). Content analysis of acculturation research in coun¬ 
seling and counseling psychology: A 22-year review. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 58, 
83-96. 

Young, A. H., & Newham, J. I. (2006). Lithium in maintenance therapy for bipolar disorder. Journal 
of Psychopharmacology, 20, 17-22. 

Young, A. S., Klap, R., Shoai, R., & Wells, K. B. (2008). Persistent depression and anxiety in the 
United States: Prevalence and quality of care. Psychiatric Services, 59, 1391-1398. 

Young, S., & Amarasinghe, J. M. (2010). Non-pharmacological treatments for ADHD: A lifespan 
approach. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51, 116-133. 

Yung, P. M., & Keltner, A. A. (1996). A controlled comparison of the effects of muscle and cognitive 
relaxation procedures on blood pressure: Implications for the behavioural treatment of border¬ 
line hypertensives. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 821-826. 

Zadra, A., & Donderi, D. C. (2000). Nightmares and bad dreams: Their prevalence and relationship 
to well-being. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 273-281. 

Zanarini, M. C. (2004). Update on pharmacotherapy of borderline personality disorder. Current 
Psychiatry Reports, 6, 66-70. 

Zanarini, M. C. (2009). Psychotherapy of borderline personality disorder. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, 120, 373-377. 

Zhang, J., Niaura, R., Todaro, J. F., McCaffery, J. M., Shen, B., Spiro, A., & Ward, K. D. (2005). 
Suppressed hostility predicted hypertension incidence among middle-aged men. The Normative 
Aging Study. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 28, 443-454. 

Zimmerman, F. J., & Christakis, D. A. (2007). Associations between content types of early media 
exposure and subsequent attentional problems. Pediatrics, 120, 986-992. 

Zito, J. M., Safer, D. J., dos Reis, S., Gardner, J. F., Boles, M., & Lynch, F. (2000). Trends in the 
prescribing of psychotropic medication to preschoolers. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 283, 1025-1030. 

Zohar, J., Juven-Wetzler, A., Myers, V., & Fostick, L. (2008). Post-traumatic stress disorder: Facts 
and fiction. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 21, 74-77. 

Zucker, K. J. (2001). Biological differences on psychosexual differentiation. In R. K. Under (Ed.), 
Handbook of the psychology of women and gender (pp. 101-115). New York, NY: Wiley. 

Zucker, K. J. (2005). Gender identity disorder in children and adolescents. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology, 1, 467-492. 



References 389 


Zucker, K. J., & Bradley, S. J. (2000). Gender identity disorder. In C. H. Zeanah (Ed.), Handbook of 
infant mental health (2nd ed., pp. 412^124). New York, NY: Guilford. 

Zucker, K. J., & Lawrence, A. A. (2009). Epidemiology of gender identity disorder: 
Recommendations for the Standards of Care of the World Professional Association for 
Transgender Health. International Journal of Transgenderism, 11, 8-18. 

Zucker, N. L., Losh, M., Bulik, C. M., LaBar, K. S., Piven, J., & Pelphrey, K. A. (2007). Anorexia 
nervosa and autism spectrum disorders: Guided investigation of social cognitive endopheno- 
types. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 976-1006. 




INDEX 


A 

AA. See Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
Abstinence violation effect, 250 
Addiction/Addictive behaviors, 9, 165 
ADHD. See Attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) 

Affect distress, 260 
African Americans, 52-107. See also 
Hypertension in an African 
American man 
Aggression, 343 

proactive aggression, 343 
reactive aggression, 343 
Aggressive obsessions, 8 
Agoraphobia, 17-34. See also Panic 
disorder with agoraphobia 
Alcohol abuse, 165 
Alcohol dependence, 159-170 
criteria, 164-165 

withdrawal symptoms, 164 
etiological considerations, 166-168 
environmental influence, 166 
genetic influence, 166 
prenatal exposure to alcohol, 167 
social acceptability of 
drinking, 167 
follow-up, 163-164 
lifetime prevalence rates for, 165 
and negative moods, 168 
reducing people’s stress response, 167 
altering response to stressful 
stimuli. 167 
muting anxiety, 167 
social history, 160-162 
tension-reducing effects of alcohol, 
167-168 


treatment, 162-163, 168-170 
A A treatment, 169 
abstinence as goal, 162-163 
assertiveness training, 169 
benzodiazepines, 168 
disulfiram, 169 
naltrexone, 169 
outpatient group therapy, 169 
relaxation training, 169 
social skills training. 169 
Alexithymia, 124 
Alprazolam (Xanax), 22, 29, 33 
Alter personalities, 75-76. See also 
Multiple personality 
Amphetamine (Adderall), 334 
Anger, hypertension and, 61-62 
Angold, A., 348 
Anhedonia, 135 
Anorexia nervosa, 221-233 
binge-eating/purging type, 228 
comorbid disorders, 228 
DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria, 227 
etiological considerations, 

229-231 

biological factors, 229 

cultural attitudes and standards, 230 

family factors, 230 

genetic factors, 229 

sexual abuse, 231 

gender based prevalence rates, 227 
onset of eating disorder, 224-226 
binge eating, 225 
restricted food intake, 224 
surgery, 224 

physical effects of starvation, 224 
restricting type, 228 
social history, 221 


391 




392 Index 


Anorexia nervosa ( Continued ) 
divorce, 223 

overprotective parents, 222 
relationships, 222-223 
treatment, 226-227, 231-233 
behavioral techniques, 232 
CBT. 231 

CBT and psychodynamic techniques 
combination, 231 
family therapy, 232 
hospitalization, 226, 232 
Antidepressants 

autistic disorder, 320 
borderline personality disorder (BPD), 
287-289 

female orgasmic disorder, 186 
major depressive disorder, 98-99 
rape trauma, 49-50 
somatization disorder, 127 
Antipsychotic drugs, 151 
atypical, 156-157 
autistic disorder, 320 
paranoid personality disorder, 281 
psychotic disorder NOS, 156 
schizophrenia, paranoid type, 

137, 142 

Antisocial personality disorder 

(ASPD), 297-308. See also 
Psychopathy 

DSM-IV-TR concept of, 301 
Anxiety disorders, 1-16. See also 

Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD); Panic disorder with 
agoraphobia 
Aphonia, 121 

ASPD. See Antisocial personality disorder 
(ASPD) 

Assertion training 

alcohol dependence, 169 
bulimia nervosa, 243-244 
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), 
5-6, 12 

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), 323-335 
conceptualization and treatment, 
326-330 

expanded school program, 329 


operant-conditioning framework, 326 
time-out procedure, 328 
conduct disorder and, 331 

Conners Rating Scale, 324—325 
DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 330 
etiological considerations, 

331-334 

social history, 323-324 
target behaviors during 
treatment, 327 
television exposure and, 333 
treatment, 334-335 

amphetamine (Adderall), 334 
long-term treatment, 334 
methylphenidate (Ritalin), 334 
types of, 330 

Atypical antipsychotic drugs, 142 
Auditory hallucinations, 137, 139, 145, 
152-154, 281 

Authoritarian parenting, 305 
Autistic disorder, 309-322 

conceptualization and treatment, 
310-315 

addressing temper tantrums, 312 
expanding vocabulary, 311 
eye contact, 310-311 
feeding skills, 313 
following commands, 311 
haloperidol (Haldol), 314 
language skills, 311 
punishment system 
implementation, 314 
self-stimulatory behavior, 
addressing, 314 
teaching Sam to dress and 
undress, 312 
toilet training, 312 
training to play, 313 
DSM-III classification, 315 
etiological considerations, 318-320 
cognitive explanations, 319 
environmental factors, 319 
genetic factors, 318-319 
neurobiological factors, 318 
features of, 315-316 

abnormality in social development, 315 
communication deficits, 316 



Index 393 


eating problems, 317 
hyperresponsiveness, 317 
repetitive sensorimotor behavior, 316 
restricted or stereotyped 
interests, 316 

gender based prevalence, 317 
treatment, 320-322 
antidepressants, 320 
antipsychotics, 320 
behavior therapy, 320 
intensive behavior therapy program, 
321 

modeling, 321 

self-stimulatory behavior, 320 
Autoimmune diseases, 59 
Autonomic underarousal, 345 
Aversion therapy, 199 
Avoidance responses, 50 

B 

Barbiturates, 29 

Behavior therapy/Behavioral treatment 
methods. See also Cognitive- 
behavioral therapy (CBT) 
for autistic disorder, 320 
for OCD, 7, 13-14 
Benzodiazepines, 33, 168 
Bereavement, 59, 94 
Berlin, F. S„ 196 
Biederman, J., 331-332 
Billstedt, E„ 316 

Binge-eating/purging type anorexia 
nervosa, 228 

Bipolar disorder, 102-114 

conceptualization and treatment, 
106-108 

cyclothymia, 110 

etiological considerations, 110-112 
genetic factors in. 111 
hypomanic episodes. 109 
manic episodes, 108 

DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 108 
marital adjustment in, 112 
prevalence, 110 
psychotherapy for, 113 
residual symptoms, 107 


schizophrenia versus, 109 
social history, 106 
symptoms, 102-103 
depression, 103 

periods of unusual ambition and 
energy, 103 

treatment, 104, 112-113 
lithium carbonate, 104, 

107-108, 112 
unipolar and, 108 
Bleuler, E., 139 
Bluglass, S„ 196 
Boardman, A. P., 125 
Body dysmorphic disorder, 120 
Body image, 231-232, 244 
Borchard, B., 196 

Borderline personality disorder (BPD), 
283-296 

antidepressant medication, 

287, 289 

conceptualization and treatment, 
288-291 

cognitive therapy, 289 
day-treatment program, 291 
DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 291 
eiological considerations, 292-294 
abnormalities in serotonin 
activity, 293 
childhood family 
environments, 293 
social history, 285-288 
treatment, 294 

dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 
295-296 

object relations psychotherapy, 
294-295 

BPD. See Borderline personality 
disorder (BPD) 

Brown, G. W„ 96 
Bulimia nervosa, 234-250 
binge/purge cycle, 235, 238 
conceptualization and treatment, 
239-246 

cognitive-behavioral 
approach, 239 
controlling appetite, 235 
etiological considerations, 247 



394 Index 


Bulimia nervosa ( Continued ) 
biological factors, 247-248 
cultural influence, 248 
psychological factors, 

248-249 
serotonin in, 248 
sociocultural influences, 248 
social history, 236-239 

negative emotional responses, 238 
substance-use problems in 
family, 236 

treatment, 10, 249-250 
CBT, 249 

drugs and CBT combination, 249 
medication, 249 

c 

Cade, J. F. J„ 112 
Callousness, 345 
Cameron, N., 279 
Carbamazepine (Tegretol), 113 
Carr, L. G.. 167 
Castellanos, F. X., 332 
Catastrophic thinking, 25-26 
Catatonic patients, 139-140 
CBT. See Cognitive-behavioral 
therapy (CBT) 

Chen, L„ 31, 332 
Child abuse 

anorexia nervosa, 231-232 
borderline personality disorder 
(BPD), 293 

multiple personality, 69 
paraphilias, 190. 198 
psychopathy, 304 
somatization disorder, 126 
Cleaning and washing rituals, 9 
Cleckley, H. E„ 306 
Cleckley, H. M„ 84, 301 
Client-centered therapy 

borderline personality disorder, 295 
hypertension, 64 

paranoid personality disorder, 281 
Clomipramine (Anafranil), 14 
Clozapine (Clozaril), 142, 156 
Coercive cycle, 346 


Cognitive approach 

anxiety disorders, 31-32 
autistic disorder, 319 
borderline personality disorder 
(BPD), 289 
bulimia nervosa, 239 
female orgasmic disorder, 186 
multiple personality, 83 
oppositional defiant disorder 
(ODD), 349 

panic disorder with agoraphobia, 
31-33 

paranoid personality disorder, 281 
rape trauma, 40—41 
somatization disorder, 128 
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) 
for anorexia nervosa, 231 
for anxiety disorders, 31 
borderline personality disorder, 289 
for bulimia nervosa, 239, 249 
for OCD, 7, 12-14 
for oppositional defiant disorder 
(ODD), 349 

for panic disorder, 31-33 
for paranoid PD, 281 
for PTSD, 49-50 
for rape trauma, 40-43 
Cognitive distortions, 25, 

231-232, 281 
Cognitive restructuring 
agoraphobia, 23, 25 
borderline personality disorder, 
289-290 

panic control treatment, 32 
posttraumatic stress disorder, 42-43 
Colby, K. M„ 279-280 
Command hallucinations, 155 
Community mental-health care, 

145, 286 

Compton, S. N., 348 
Compulsions. See also Obsessive- 
compulsive disorder (OCD) 
addictive behaviors and, 9 
DSM-IV-TR defining, 7-8 
repetitive checking, 9 
Conditioning model of panic 
disorder, 31 



Index 395 


Conduct disorder and ADHD, 331 
Conners Rating Scale, 324-325 
Contamination, fear of, 8 
Contingency management, 

326-327 

Conversion disorder, 120 
Cook, T. A. R„ 167 
Cooney, N. L.. 169 
Coping mechanisms, 62 
Cormier, C. A., 306 
Costello, E. J„ 348 
Counting rituals, 1, 5 
Craig, T. K. J„ 125-126 
Criminal activity, 301 
Cross-gender identity, 216. See also 
Transsexualism 
Cyclothymia, 110 

D 

Dandescu, A., 200 
Danesh, J., 156 
Davison, G. C., 200 
DBT. See Dialectical behavior therapy 
(DBT) 

Delusional beliefs, 215 

obsessive thoughts versus, 10 
Delusions, 155 
Dementia praecox, 109, 139 
Depo-testosterone, 210 
Depression. See also Major depressive 
disorder 

bipolar disorder, 103 
female orgasmic disorder, 182 
hypertension and, 61-62 
in OCD, 10 
versus mourning, 95 
Developmental model, dissociative 
identity disorder, 84 
Deviant sexual practices, 188-201. See 
also Paraphilias 

Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 
295-296 

Diathesis-stress model, 111 
Diazepam ( Valium), 33 
DID. See Dissociative identity disorder 
(DID) 


Disruptive behavior, 343 
Dissociative identity disorder (DID), 
71-86. See also Multiple 
personality 
Disulfiram, 169 

Dizygotic (DZ) twins, 140, 218, 247, 304, 
319, 332, 345 
Drake, H.. 125 
Dual diagnosis, 152 
Dumughn, C., 196 
Dyspareunia, 180 
Dysthymia, 76, 94 
Dysthymic disorder, 196 

E 

Eating disorders, 221-233. See also 
Anorexia nervosa; Bulimia 
nervosa 
Echolalia, 316 

EE. See Expressed emotion (EE) 

Eisen, J. L., 8 

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 100 
Emmers-Sommer, T. M., 198 
Emotional dysregulation, 291, 294 
Environmental factors 
alcohol dependence, 166 
autistic disorder, 319 
borderline personality disorder (BPD), 
293 

oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), 
346 

psychopathy, 304 
transsexualism, 218 
ERP. See Exposure and response 
prevention (ERP) 

Essential hypertension, 60-63 
Ethnicity and psychological disorders, 

52-107. See also Hypertension in 
an African American man 
Excitement phase of sexual response 
cycle, 180 

Exhibitionism, 188-201 
conviction for, 196 

Exposure and response prevention (ERP), 
for OCD, 7 

Expressed emotion (EE), 141-143 



396 Index 


F 

Fairbum, C.G., 239 

Family therapy approaches, oppositional 
defiant disorder (ODD), 349 
Faraone, S. V., 332 
Fazel, S„ 156 
Fear of contamination, 8 
Female orgasmic disorder, 

171-187 

behavioral model of, 183-184 
conceptualization and treatment, 
175-179 

addressing sexual fantasies, 176-177 
attitudes and beliefs about sexual 
behavior, 176 

communication during intercourse, 

175,178 

ejaculatory control issue, 178 
sensate focus, 177 
“start-stop” procedure, 178 
DSM-IV-TR definition, 182 
excitement phase, 180 
guilt over frequent 

masturbation, 171 

intercourse, inability to reach orgasm 
during, 171-172 
limited foreplay, 171 
orgasmic phase, 180 
past events influence, 183 
personal distress issue, 182 
premature ejaculation and, 

171-187 

psychoanalytic approach, 182-183 
resolution phase, 180 
response patterns provoking, 

184-185 

social history, 173-175 
social skills approach to, 184 
treatment, 185-187 

antidepressant medication, 186 
cognitive-behavioral 
approach, 186 

prognosis for orgasmic dysfunction 
in women, 186 
sensate focus exercise. 186 
start-stop procedure for treating 
premature ejaculation, 186 


Female sexual arousal disorder, 180 
Fetishism, 195 
Fink, P„ 122 

Fluoxetine (Prozac), 14, 32, 92, 99-100 
Fluvoxamine (Luvox), 14, 32, 99 
Freud, S„ 11, 95, 278 
Frotteurism, 188-201 

G 

GAD. See Generalized anxiety disorder 
(GAD) 

Gender differences 
anorexia nervosa, 227 
autistic disorder, 317 
bipolar disorder, 110 
hypertension, 60, 62 
nightmare disorder, 258 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 10 
posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), 47 

schizophrenia, paranoid type. 139 
somatization disorder, 123 
Gender identity disorders, 202-220. 

See also Transsexualism 
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 
28-29, 47 
Genetic factors 

alcohol dependence, 166 
anorexia nervosa, 229 
autistic disorder, 318-319 
bipolar disorder, 111 
psychopathy, 304 

schizophrenia, paranoid type, 140-141 
somatization disorder, 127 
transsexualism, 218 
Gillberg, C„ 316 
Gillberg, I. C„ 316 
Goodman, R., 332 
Green, R., 127 

Group cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(CBT), 128 
Gunderson, J. G., 295 

H 

Hallucinations. 134 
Haloperidol (Haldol). 106, 314 



Index 397 


Hancox, R. J., 333 
Harris, G. T„ 306 
Harris, T. O., 96, 126 
Hennen, J., 196 
Hinder, S„ 196 
Homelessness, 145, 149, 152 
Homosexuality, transsexualism 
and, relationship 
between, 216 
Hopelessness, 98, 150 
Hormone therapy, 210-211 
Hostility, hypertension and, 

61-62 
Hoyer, J., 196 
Hyperarousal, 48, 60 
Hyperresponsiveness, 317 
Hypertension 

biological theories, 59 
body’s immune system, 59 
somatic-weakness theory, 59 
specific-reaction theory, 59 
stress effect, 59 
death rates, 60 

in industrialized countries, 60 
prevalence, 60 
psychological theories, 60 
psychosocial factors related to, 61 
anger and hostility, 61-62 
depression, 61-62 
effects of racism, 61 
social isolation, 61 
Hypnagogic hallucinations, 260 
Hypoactive sexual desire 
disorder, 180 
Hypochondriasis, 8 
Hypomanic episodes. 109 
Hysterectomy, 126-127 

I 

Iatrogenic harm, 122 
ICD. See International Classification of 
Diseases (ICD) 

Imagery Rehearsal Therapy (IRT), 

254, 261 

educational component, 261 
imagery training component, 261 


Imipramine (Tofranil), 32, 272 
Impulse control, 290 
anorexia nervosa, 228 
borderline personality disorder, 287 
Individual play therapy, 341-342 
International Classification of Diseases 
(ICD), 47 

Interpersonal psychotherapy 
(IPT), 99 

IRT. See Imagery Rehearsal 
Therapy (IRT) 

Isolated Sleep Paralysis (ISP), 
251-264 

cultural name, 259 


J 

Johnson, V. E.. 185 
Jones, J., 332 


K 

Kabela, E.. 169 
Kadden, R. M„ 169 
Kafka, M. P, 196 
Kanner, L., 318 
Kanner, Leo, 315 
Keeler, G„ 348 
Kernberg, O. F., 294 
Kraepelin, E. 109, 139 
Kringlen, E., 10 
Kruttschnitt, C., 305 


L 

Landhuis, C. E„ 333 
Learned illness behavior, 125 
Leue, A.. 196 
Lindahl, K. M„ 295, 348 
Linehan, M. M„ 295 
Lithium carbonate, 104, 107-108, 
112-113 
Litt, M. D„ 169 
Lotter, V., 318 
Lovaas, Ivar, 321 
Luczak, S. E., 167 



398 Index 


M 

Macmillan, R., 305 
Major depressive disorder, 

87-101 

clinical depression versus unhappiness 
and disappointment, 94 
conceptualization and treatment, 90-93 
depression versus mourning, 95 
depressive triad, 93 

negative view of the self, the world, 
and the future, 93 
etiological considerations, 94-98 
stressful life events, 96 
social history, 89-90 
divorce, 89-90 

social-learning views of depression, 97 
treatment, 98-100 

antidepressant medication, 99 
deficits in social skills, addressing, 
99 

fluoxetine (Prozac), 92, 99-100 
fluvoxamine (Luvox), 99 
interpersonal communication, 
improving, 99 
monoamine oxidase (MAO) 
inhibitors, 99 

parenting skills, improving, 99 
parent-training group, 90 
paroxetine (Paxil), 99 
problem-solving approach, 91 
psychotherapy and antidepressant 
medication combination, 98 
sertraline (Zoloft), 99 
SSRIs, 99 

tricyclics (TCAs), 99 
Male erectile disorder, 180 
Male orgasmic disorder, 180 
Malingering, 76, 82 
Manic episodes, 108-110. See also 
Bipolar disorder 
hypomanic episodes, 109 
Marcoen, A., 333 
Marlatt, G. A„ 170 
Masters, W. H„ 185 
Masturbation 
female, 171 

paraphilias, 188-189, 192, 195-200 


sexual dysfunction, 171, 175-176, 182, 
185-186 

transsexualism, 209, 211 
Maturational problems, 229 
McMorris, B. J., 305 
Medication 

borderline personality disorder (BPD), 
287, 289 

bulimia nervosa, 249 
female orgasmic disorder, 186 
hypertension, 56, 63 
major depressive disorder, 98-99 
obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD). 14-15 

panic disorder with agoraphobia, 32 
paranoid personality disorder, 281 
psychotic disorder NOS, 156 
for PTSD, 49-50 
rape trauma, 49-50 
schizophrenia, paranoid type. 137 
Meditation, 65 
Meehl, P. E„ 135 
Menorrhagia, 126-127 
Methylphenidate (Ritalin), 334 
Millberger, S„ 332 
Mills, K„ 125 

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory (MMPI)-2, 253 
Moffitt, T. E„ 305 
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) 
inhibitors, 99 

Monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) 
gene, 304 

Mood disorders, 109-110. See also 
Bipolar disorder 
Motivational interviewing, 14 
Multiple personality, 68-86 

conceptualization and treatment, 76-78 
diagnostic signs, 81 
by disruption of consciousness, 
precipitated by stressful 
experiences, 77 

DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for, 80 
etiological considerations, 82-84 
malingering, 76, 82 
sociocognitive model, 83 
follow-up, 78-79 
media attention to, 80 



Index 399 


social history, 75-76 
treatment, 70 

dissociative episodes, resolving, 77 
hypnosis use in, 70, 74, 83 
integrating the disparate personalities 
into one, 77, 84-85 
interpersonal, problem-solving 
approach, 78 

nondissociative coping skills, 78 
stabilizing the most functional 
personality, 77, 84 
traumatic incident, recalling, 71 
videotape use, 74, 84-85 
Mutism, 316 

N 

NA. See Narcotics Anonymous (NA) 
Naltrexone, 169 
Narcissistic PD, 277 

DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 277 
Narcotics Anonymous (NA), 290 
National Comorbidity Study 
(NCS), 47 

National Health and Social Life Survey, 
44, 181 

Neurosurgery, 15 
Nightmare disorder, 251-264 
gender-based prevalence, 258 
treatment, 253-256 

imagery, practicing, 254 
relaxation techniques, 254-255 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 97 
Noncompliance, 128-129 

attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 
327-328 

psychotic disorder (NOS), 

152, 157 

o 

Object relations psychotherapy, 

294-295 

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 
1-16. See also Compulsions 
conceptualization and treatment, 5-7 
addressing religious concerns, 6 
anxiety-reducing rituals, 7 


assertion training, systematic 
program of, 5-6, 12 
behavioral treatment, 7, 13 
interpersonal skills, development, 
5-6 

motivational interviewing, 14 
neurosurgery, 15 

response-prevention procedure, 7 
depression in, 10 
DSM-IV-TR defining, 7 
epidemiological studies, 10 
follow-up assessments. 10-11 
medication, 14-15 

clomipramine (anafranil), 14 
fluoxetine (Prozac), 14 
fluvoxamine (Luvox), 14 
sertraline (Zoloft), 14 
SSRIs, 14 

obsessive-compulsive personality 
disorder (OCPD ) versus, 9 
obsessive thoughts versus delusional 
beliefs, 10 

phobic disorders and, 9 
prevalence, 10 
self-injury thoughts, 4 
social history, 2-5 
symptoms, 1, 8 

theoretical perspectives, 11-15 
treatment implications, 11-15 

ODD. See Oppositional defiant disorder 
(ODD) 

Olanzapine, 156 

Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), 
336-350 
aggression, 343 
proactive aggression, 343 
reactive aggression, 343 
conceptualization and treatment, 
339-342 

family sessions, 341 
individual play therapy, 341-342 
time-out procedure, 340-341 
disruptive behavior, 343 
DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 342 
etiological considerations, 

344-348 

autonomic underarousal, 345 
biological factors, 346 



400 Index 


Oppositional defiant disorder 
(ODD) ( Continued) 
conduct disorder, 344 
environmental causal factors, 346 
marital dissatisfaction, 347 
parenting, 346 
personality traits, 345 
social factors, 346 
temperament, 345 
social and family history, 337-339 
moodiness, 338 

studies using clinical samples, 344 
treatment, 348-350 
cognitive behavioral 
approaches, 349 
family therapy approaches, 349 
Orgasmic disorder, 171-187. See also 
Female orgasmic disorder 

P 

Panic control treatment, 32 
Panic disorder with agoraphobia, 17-34 
conceptualization and treatment, 22-27 
catastrophic thinking, 25-26 
cognitive restructuring, 23, 25 
probability overestimation, 25 
reducing generalized anxiety, 23 
relaxation training, 23-24 
situational exposure, 23 
DSM-IV-TR definition, 28 
etiological considerations, 30-31 
conditioning model, 31 
medications, 32 
panic control treatment, 32 
social history, 19-22 

family background, 19-20 
relationships, 20-21 
treatment, 31-33 

relaxation and cognitive approach, 
combined use of, 31-33 
Paranoid patients, 139-140 
Paranoid personality disorder, 265-282 
DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 276 
features of, 275-281 
follow-up, 273-275 
later adjustment, 268-273 


psychological theories, 278-280 
social history, 265-268 
treatment, 280-281 

antipsychotic medication, 281 
cognitive therapy, 281 
difficulties in, 280-281 
social skills development, 281 
Paraphilias, 188-201 

conceptualization and treatment, 
192-194 

changing sexual fantasies, 192 
marital therapy, 192-193 
etiological considerations, 197-199 
childhood emotional abuse, 198 
as a disorder of courtship behaviors 
and skills in men, 198 
exhibitionism, 188-201 
frotteurism, 188-201 
masturbatory fantasies. 189 
Paraphilia NOS, 195 
sexual deviance, 188 
social history, 190-191 
treatment, 199-201 

alternative behavioral completion, 
200 

antiandrogen cyproterone acetate 
for, 200 

aversion therapy, 199 
biological interventions, 200 
changing masturbation fantasies, 200 
ethical issues in, 199 
involuntary surgical castration, 199 
Parasomnia, 251-264. See also Isolated 
Sleep Paralysis (ISP); Nightmare 
disorder 

Asian Americans and psychological 
intervention, 261-263 
cultural background, 262 
ethnic background, 262 
ethnicity, 262 
racial self-hate, 263 
criteria, 257 

cultural issues, 261-263 
etiological cnsiderations, 259-261 
affect distress, 260 
distressing dreams, 260 
hypnagogic hallucinations, 260 



Index 401 


reduced sense of self-consciousness, 
259 

social history, 252-253 
abusive father, 252 
academic pressure, 252 
nightmares, 252 
treatment, 253-256, 261 
Paroxetine (Paxil), 99, 186 
Pathological doubt, OCD and, 8 
Patterson, G. R., 346 
Pauls, D. L.. 278 
Pedophilia, 195-196 
Personality disorders. See Antisocial 
personality disorder (ASPD); 
Borderline personality disorder 
(BPD); Multiple personality; 
Paranoid personality disorder; 
Violence and mental disorders 
Pervasive developmental disorders, 

315. See also Autistic disorder 
Phobias, 29 
Phobic disorders, 9 

Placebo-controlled outcome studies, for 
panic attacks, 33 
Play therapy, 341-342 
Polygraph (lie detector) testing, 197 
Positive reinforcement, 355 
Posttraumatic stress disorder 

(PTSD), 35-51. See also 
Rape trauma 

as an anxiety disorder, 47 
classification, criticisms for, 46 
prevalence, 47 
Poulton, R., 333 
Premature ejaculation, 171-187 
Prison inmates, psychopathology among, 
302,306 

Probability overestimation, 25 
Prodromal phase, 138 
Psychopathy, 297-308 
autonomic nervous system 
role in, 303 

etiological considerations, 302-306 
arousing negative emotions, 303 
child maltreatment, 304 
deficits in neurological functions, 305 
environmental factors, 304 


genetic factors, 304 
monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) 
gene, 304 

physical abuse, 304 
social factors, 305 
neurobiological investigations, 302 
stealing, 298-300 
traits, 300-301 
treatment, 306-307 

Psychotic disorder not otherwise specified 
(NOS), 145-158 
auditory hallucinations, 154 
community treatment, 150-152 
detoxification programs, 150 
rehabilitation program, 150 
dual diagnosis, 152 
etiological considerations, 

153-154 

hostile behaviors, 151 
impulsivity, 151 
schizoaffective disorder, 153 
social history, 146-150 
substance dependence, 145-158 
treatment, 156-157 

antipsychotic medication, 156 
Punishment 

attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 
326 

autistic disorder, 313-314 
borderline personality disorder, 
292-293 

major depressive disorder, 95 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, 3 
oppositional defiant disorder, 

345-346 
paraphilias, 199 
psychopathy, 303 
Putnam, F. W„ 83-84 

R 

Race issues and psychotherapy, 65-66. 
See also ffypertension in an 
African American man 
Racism, hypertension and, 61 
Rape trauma, 35-51 
anxiety symptoms, 38 



402 Index 


Rape trauma ( Continued ) 

cognitive-behavioral intervention 
for, 40 

anger-management training, 43 
“reliving” traumatic experience, 40 
conceptualization and treatment, 
38-41 

DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 44 
etiological considerations, 48-49 
impact of rape, 42 

avoiding emotional intimacy, 42 
strained relation with men, 42 
PTSD development following, 47-48 
reexperiencing of trauma, 45 
social history, 37-38 
symptoms, 35 

treating distorted thoughts, 43 
treatment, 49-50 

antidepressant medication, 49-50 
cognitive-behavior therapy, 49-50 
Rasmussen, S. A., 8 
Relaxation training 
agoraphobia, 23-24 
hypertension, 65 
nightmare disorder, 254-255 
for panic disorders, 23-24 
Reliability, interrater, 276-277 
Repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (rTMS). 169 
Repression, 77, 121, 279 
Resolution phase of sexual response 
cycle, 180 

Response patterns, 11, 99, 184, 275 
Restricting type anorexia nervosa, 228 
Rice, M. E„ 306 

Risperidone (Risperdal), 137, 142, 156 

Ritalin, 334 

Rogers, C. R.. 281 

rTMS. See Repetitive transcranial 

magnetic stimulation (rTMS) 

S 

Saad, K.. 196 
Saleh, F. M„ 196 
Schizoaffective disorder, 153 
DSM-IV-TR criteria for, 153 


Schizophrenia versus bipolar 
disorder, 109 

Schizophrenia, paranoid type, 

130-144 

conceptualization and treatment, 
134-138 
anhedonia, 135 
antipsychotic medication, 137 
delusional thinking, 137 
home-based program, 136 
interpersonal aversiveness, 135 
self-talk, 136 

stimulus-control procedure, 136 
DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria, 138 
characteristic symptoms, 138 
duration, 138 
social/occupational 
dysfunction, 138 

etiological considerations, 140-141 
gender differences in prevalence, 139 
genetic factors in, 140-141 

expressed emotion (EE), 141-143 
nutritional deficiencies, 141 
prenatal infections, 141 
viral infections, 141 
social history, 133-134 
subgroups, 139-140 

based on symptom dimensions, 
140 

catatonic, 139-140 
disorganization, 140 
negative symptoms, 140 
paranoid, 139-140 
psychotic symptoms, 140 
symptomatically defined, 140 
symptoms, 130-131 

delusional beliefs, 131-132 
intrusive and repetitive thoughts, 
131 

self-talk, 130, 136 
social isolation, 130 
treatment, 142-143 

antipsychotic drugs, 142 
clozapine (Clozaril), 142 
risperidone (Risperdal), 142 
Schneider, K.. 135 
Segal, N. L„ 218 



Index 403 


Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), 14, 99 
for panic attacks, 32 
major depressive disorder, 99 
obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD). 14 

panic disorder with agoraphobia, 32 
Self-imposed starvation, 224—226 
Self-stimulatory behaviors, 309 
Sensate focus, 177 

Serotonin, 248, 293. See also Selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) 

Sertraline (Zoloft), 14, 99 
Sexual abuse 

anorexia nervosa, 231 
borderline personality disorder 
(BPD), 293 

multiple personality, 69 
paraphilias, 190, 198 
psychopathy, 304 
somatization disorder, 126 
Sexual aversion disorder, 180 
Sexual dysfunctions, 171-187. See also 
Female orgasmic disorder 
dyspareunia, 180 
female orgasmic disorder, 180 
female sexual arousal disorder, 

180 

hypoactive sexual desire 
disorder, 180 

male erectile disorder, 180 
male orgasmic disorder, 180 
premature ejaculation, 180 
sexual aversion disorder, 180 
vaginismus, 180 
Sexual masochism, 195 
Sexual obsessions, 8 
Sexual sadism, 195 
Shea, S. H„ 167 
Shock therapy, 100 
Sleep disorders, 256-264. See also 
Parasomnia 
Sobell, M. B„ 169 

Social isolation, hypertension and, 61 
Social phobia, 27, 29 
Sodium benzoate, 333 


Somatic obsessions, 8 
Somatic-weakness theory, 59 
Somatization disorder, 115-129 
age of onset of, 123 
alexithymia and, 124 
aphonia, 121 
diagnostic criteria, 120 

gastrointestinal symptoms, 120 
pain symptoms, 120 
pseudoneurological symptom, 121 
sexual symptom, 120 
DSM-IV-TR defining, 120 
emotional stress. 121 
emotional upset role in exacerbating 
pain, 119 

etiological considerations, 124—127 
childhood adversity, 126 
childhood illness, 126 
cultural factors, 124 
psychological distress, 124 
genetic factors in, 127 
group cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(CBT) for, 128 
histrionic nature, 121 
physical symptoms due to 
psychological problems, 
119-120 
prevalence, 123 
secondary gain, 125 
social history, 117-118 
symptoms, 115-116 

abdominal distention, 116 
anxiety, 116 
frequent headaches, 116 
physical problems, 115-116 
sharp pain, 116 
uncomfortable bloating, 116 
treatment, 118-119 
antidepressants, 127 
tryptophan levels and, 127 
types of surgery for somatizers, 122 
Specific-reaction theory, 59 
Spiegel, D., 79 

SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) 

‘Start-stop’ procedure, 178 
Stevenson, J., 332 



404 Index 


Stoller, R. J„ 217 
Stormshak, E. A., 347 
Stigma, of mental disorders, 154 
Stress 

hypertension and, 59, 61 
immune system weakening 
by, 59 

Stimulus-control procedures, 136 
Stress 

alcohol dependence, 167 
bulimia nervosa, 238 
female orgasmic disorder, 182 
hypertension, 59, 61 
multiple personality, 77 
parasomnia, 260 
somatization disorder, 121 
Substance dependence, 145-158. See also 
Psychotic disorder not otherwise 
specified (NOS) 

Sue, D. W, 262 
Sugarman, R, 196 
Suicidal ideation/thoughts, 69 
Superstition, 5, 9, 232 
Symmetry, need for, 8 

T 

Tardive dyskinesia, 142 
Television exposure and attention 
problems, 333 
Test anxiety, 20 
Thalidomide, 319 
Thigpen, C. H„ 84 
Thimerosal, 320 
Theory of mind, 319 
Thought insertion, 135 
Time-out procedure, 340-341 
Transsexualism, 202-220 

conceptualization and treatment, 
209-210 

disturbances in gender identity, 215 
DSM-IV-TR description of, 214 
etiological considerations, 217-218 
environmental events, 218 
genetic factors, 218 
parents and family, importance of, 217 
peer relations role, 217 


female transsexuals versus male 
transsexuals, 216 
and homosexuality, relationship 
between, 216 

intimate relationships, 203, 

205, 207 

social history, 204-209 
subjective perception, 203 
symptoms, 202-203 
and transvestic fetishism, comparing, 
215 

treatment, 219-220 

surgery for female-to-male 
transsexuals, 219 
surgery for male-to-female 
transsexuals, 219 
Transvestic fetishism, 195, 215 
Tricyclics (TCAs), 99 
Tryptophan, 127 
Twin studies, 61 

anorexia nervosa, 229 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 
332 

autism, 319 
bulimia nervosa, 247 
oppositional defiant disorder, 345 
psychopathy, 304 
schizophrenia, 140-141 
somatization disorder, 117 
transsexualism, 217-218 

u 

Unipolar disorder, 108 

V 

Vaccines, autism and, 320 
Vaginismus, 180 
Vaillant, G. E.. 169 
Valproic acid (Depakote). 113 
Van den Bergh, B. R. H„ 333 
Victim versus survivor, 46 
Victimization, 348 

Violence and mental disorders, 154-156 
command hallucinations, 155 
delusions, 155 



Index 405 


personality disorders, 155 
substance-use disorders, 155 
Violence, 145-158 
Voyeurism, 195-196 


Women, disorders in. See Gender 
differences 

World Health Organization International 
Study of Schizophrenia, 139 


w X 

Waldinger, R. J„ 295 Xanax, 22, 29, 33 

Wall, T. L„ 167 
Welch, D„ 333 

Whalen, C. K„ 334 L 

Wolfe, R„ 200 Zoloft, 14, 50, 99 



