SECOND EDITION 


COGNITIVE 

BEHAVIOR 

THERAPY 

Basics and Beyond 



Judith S. Beck 


Foreword by Aaron T. Beck 






COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY 



COGNITIVE 

BEHAVIOR 

THERAPY 

Basics and Beyond 

SECOND EDITION 

Judith S. Beck 

Foreword by Aaron T. Beck 



THE GUILFORD PRESS 
New York London 



©2011 Judiths. Beck 
Published by The Guilford Press 
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc. 

72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012 
www.guilford.com 

All rights reserved 

Except as indicated, no part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written 
permission from the publisher. 

Printed in the United States of America 

This book is printed on acid-free paper. 

Last digit is print number: 987654321 

LIMITED PHOTOCOPY LICENSE 

These materials are intended for use only by qualified mental health professionals. 

The Publisher grants to individual purchasers of this book nonassignable permis¬ 
sion to reproduce all materials for which photocopying permission is specifically 
granted in a footnote. This license is limited to you, the individual purchaser, for 
personal use or use with individual clients. This license does not grant the right to 
reproduce these materials for resale, redistribution, electronic display, or any other 
purposes (including but not limited to books, pamphlets, articles, video- or audio- 
tapes, blogs, file-sharing sites, Internet or intranet sites, and handouts or slides for 
lectures, workshops, webinars, or therapy groups, whether or not a fee is charged). 
Permission to reproduce these materials for these and any other purposes must be 
obtained in writing from the Permissions Department of Guilford Publications. 


The author has checked with sources believed to be reliable in her effort to provide 
information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards of practice 
that are accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of 
human error or changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences, neither 
the author, nor the editor and publisher, nor any other party who has been involved 
in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the information 
contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they are not 
responsible for any errors or omissions or the results obtained from the use of such 
information. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained in this 
book with other sources. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Beck, Judith S. 

Cognitive behavior therapy : basics and beyond / Judith S. Beck.-2nd ed. 
p. cm. 

Rev. ed. of: Cognitive therapy. cl995. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 978-1-60918-504-6 (hardcover) 

1. Cognitive therapy. 1. Beck, Judith S. Cognitive therapy. 11. Title. 
RC489.C63B43 2011 
616.89U425—dc22 


2011002830 



To my father, 
Aaron T Beck, MD 



ABOUTTHE AUTHOR 


Judith S. Beck, PhD, is President of the Beck Institute for Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy {wwiu.beckinstitute.org) and Clinical Associate Profes¬ 
sor of Psychology in Psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine. She has written nearly 100 articles and chapters as well as 
several hooks for professionals and consumers; has made hundreds of 
presentations, nationally and internationally, on topics related to cogni¬ 
tive behavior therapy; and is the codeveloper of the Beck Youth Inven¬ 
tories and the Personality Belief Questionnaire. Dr. Beck is a founding 
fellow and past president of the Academy of Cognitive Therapy. 


VII 



FOREWORD 


I am delighted that the success of the hrst edition of Cognitive Ther¬ 
apy: Basics and Beyond has prompted this revision. It offers readers 
fresh insights into this approach to psychotherapy, and, I trust, will 
be welcomed by those who are versed in cognitive behavior therapy 
as well as students new to the held. Given the tremendous amount of 
new research and expansion of ideas that continue to move the held in 
exciting new directions, I applaud the efforts to expand this volume to 
incorporate some of the different ways of conceptualizing and treating 
our patients. 

I would like to take the reader back to the early days of cognitive 
therapy and its development since then. When I hrst started treating 
patients with a set of therapeutic procedures that I subsequently labeled 
“cognitive therapy” (and now refer to as “cognitive behavior therapy”), I 
had no idea where this approach—which departed so strongly from my 
psychoanalytic training—would lead me. Based on my clinical obser¬ 
vations and some systematic clinical studies and experiments, I theo¬ 
rized that there was a thinking disorder at the core of the psychiatric 
syndromes such as depression and anxiety. This disorder was rehected 
in a systematic bias in the way the patients interpreted particular expe¬ 
riences. By pointing out these biased interpretations and proposing 
alternatives—that is, more probable explanations—I found that I could 
produce an almost immediate lessening of the symptoms. Training the 
patients in these cognitive skills helped to sustain the improvement. 
This concentration on here-and-now problems appeared to produce 
almost total alleviation of symptoms in 10 to 14 weeks. Later clinical tri- 


IX 


X 


Foreword 


als by my own group and clinicians/investigators elsewhere supported 
the efficacy of this approach for anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, 
and panic disorder. 

By the mid-1980s, I could claim that cognitive therapy had attained 
the status of a “system of psychotherapy.” It consisted of (1) a theory of 
personality and psychopathology with solid empirical findings to sup¬ 
port its basic postulates; (2) a model of psychotherapy, with sets of prin¬ 
ciples and strategies that blended with the theory of psychopathology; 
and (3) solid empirical findings based on clinical outcome studies to 
support the efficacy of this approach. 

Since my earlier work, a new generation of therapists/researchers/ 
teachers has conducted basic investigations of the conceptual model 
of psychopathology and applied cognitive behavior therapy to a broad 
spectrum of psychiatric disorders. The systematic investigations explore 
the basic cognitive dimensions of personality and the psychiatric disor¬ 
ders, the idiosyncratic processing and recall of information in these 
disorders, and the relationship between vulnerability and stress. 

The applications of cognitive behavior therapy to a host of psy¬ 
chological and medical disorders extend far beyond anything I could 
have imagined when I treated my first few cases of depression and 
anxiety with cognitive therapy. On the basis of outcome trials, inves¬ 
tigators throughout the world, but particularly the United States, have 
established that cognitive behavior therapy is effective in conditions as 
diverse as posttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, 
phobias of all kinds, and eating disorders. Often in combination with 
medication, it has been helpful in the treatment of bipolar disorder and 
schizophrenia. Cognitive therapy has also been found to be beneficial 
in a wide variety of chronic medical disorders such as low back pain, 
colitis, hypertension, and chronic fatigue syndrome. 

With a smorgasbord of applications of cognitive behavior therapy, 
how can an aspiring therapist begin to learn the nuts and bolts of this 
therapy? Extracting from Alice in Wonderland, “Start at the beginning.” 
This now brings us back to the question at the beginning of this fore¬ 
word. The purpose of this book by Dr. Judith Beck, one of the foremost 
second-generation cognitive behavior therapists (and who, as a teen¬ 
ager, was one of the first to listen to me expound on my new theory), is 
to provide a solid basic foundation for the practice of cognitive behavior 
therapy. Despite the formidable array of different applications of cog¬ 
nitive behavior therapy, they all are based on fundamental principles 
outlined in this volume. Even experienced cognitive behavior thera¬ 
pists should find this book quite helpful in sharpening their conceptu¬ 
alization skills, expanding their repertoire of therapeutic techniques, 
planning more effective treatment, and troubleshooting difficulties in 
therapy. 


Foreword 


XI 


Of course, no book can substitute for supervision in cognitive 
behavior therapy. But this book is an important volume and can be 
supplemented by supervision, which is readily available from a network 
of trained cognitive therapists (see Appendix B). 

Dr. Judith Beck is eminently qualified to offer this guide to cogni¬ 
tive behavior therapy. For the past 25 years, she has conducted numer¬ 
ous workshops and trainings in cognitive behavior therapy, supervised 
both beginners and experienced therapists, helped develop treatment 
protocols for various disorders, and participated actively in research on 
cognitive behavior therapy. With such a background to draw on, she has 
written a book with a rich lode of information to apply this therapy, the 
first edition of which has been the leading cognitive behavior therapy 
text in most graduate psychology, psychiatry, social work, and counsel¬ 
ing programs. 

The practice of cognitive behavior therapy is not simple. I have 
observed a number of participants in clinical trials, for example, who 
can go through the motions of working with “automatic thoughts,” 
without any real understanding of the patients’ perceptions of their 
personal world or any sense of the principle of “collaborative empiri¬ 
cism.” The purpose of Dr. Judith Beck’s book is to educate, to teach, 
and to train both the novice and the experienced therapist in cognitive 
behavior therapy, and she has succeeded admirably in this mission. 

Aaron T. Beck, MD 

Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy 

Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania 



PREFACE 


T he past two decades have been an exciting time in the field of cog¬ 
nitive therapy. With the explosion of new research, cognitive behav¬ 
ior therapy has become the treatment of choice for many disorders, 
not only because it reduces people’s suffering quickly and moves them 
toward remission, but also because it helps them stay well. A central 
mission of our nonprofit organization, the Beck Institute for Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy, is to provide state-of-the-art training to health and 
mental health professionals in Philadelphia and throughout the world. 
But exposure to this type of psychotherapy through workshops and var¬ 
ious training programs is not enough. Having trained many thousands 
of people in the past 25 years, I still find that people need a basic man¬ 
ual to read and to which they can repeatedly refer if they are to master 
the theory, principles, and practice of cognitive behavior therapy. 

This book is designed for a broad audience of health and mental 
health professionals, from those who have never been exposed to cog¬ 
nitive behavior therapy before to those who are quite experienced but 
wish to improve their skills, including how to conceptualize patients 
cognitively, plan treatment, employ a variety of techniques, assess the 
effectiveness of their treatment, and specify problems that arise in a 
therapy session. To present the material as simply as possible, I have 
chosen one patient (whose name and identifying characteristics I have 
changed) to use as an example throughout the book. Sally is an ideal 
patient in many ways, and her treatment clearly exemplifies “standard” 
cognitive behavior therapy for uncomplicated, single-episode depres¬ 
sion. Although the treatment described is for a straightforward case of 

xiii 


XIV 


Preface 


depression with anxious features, the techniques presented also apply 
to patients with a wide variety of problems. References for other dis¬ 
orders are provided so that the reader can learn to tailor treatment 
appropriately. 

The hrst edition of this book was published in more than 20 lan¬ 
guages, and I received feedback from all over the world, much of which 
I have incorporated into this new edition. I have included new mate¬ 
rial on evaluation and behavioral activation, the Cognitive Therapy 
Rating Scale (used in many research studies and training programs 
to measure therapist competency), and a Cognitive Case Write-Up 
(based on the template provided by the Academy of Cognitive Ther¬ 
apy as a prerequisite to receiving certihcation). I have also integrated 
a greater emphasis on the therapeutic relationship, guided discovery 
and Socratic questioning, eliciting and using patients’ strengths and 
resources, and homework. I have been guided by my clinical practice, 
teaching, and supervision; by research and publications in the held; 
and by discussions with students and colleagues, from novice to expert, 
from many different countries, who specialize in various aspects of cog¬ 
nitive behavior therapy and in many different disorders. 

This book could not have been written without the groundbreak¬ 
ing work of the father of cognitive therapy, Aaron T. Beck, who is also 
my father and an extraordinary scientist, theorist, practitioner, and per¬ 
son. I have also learned a great deal from every supervisor, supervisee, 
and patient with whom I have worked. I am grateful to them all. 


Judith S. Beck, PhD 


CONTENTS 


Chapter 1. 


Chapter 2. 


Chapter 3. 


Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 1 

What Is Cognitive Behavior Therapy? 2 
What Is the Theory Underlying 
Cognitive Behavior Therapy? 3 
What Does the Research Say? 4 
How Was Beck’s Cognitive Behavior 
Therapy Developed? 5 

What Are the Basic Principles of Treatment? 6 
What Is a Therapy Session Like? II 
Developing as a Cognitive Behavior Therapist 12 
How to Use This Book 14 

Overview of Treatment 17 

Developing the Therapeutic Relationship 17 
Planning Treatment and Structuring Sessions 21 
Identifying and Responding 

to Dysfunctional Cognitions 22 
Emphasizing the Positive 26 
Facilitating Cognitive and Behavioral Change 
between Sessions (Homework) 27 

Cognitive Conceptualization 29 

The Cognitive Model 30 
Beliefs 32 

Relationship of Behavior to Automatic Thoughts 36 


XV 


XVI 


Contents 


Chapter 4. 


Chapter 5. 


Chapter 6. 


Chapter 7. 


Chapter 8. 


The Evaluation Session 

Goals of the Assessment Session 47 
Structure of the Assessment Session 48 
Starting the Evaluation Session 48 
The Assessment Phase 49 
Final Part of the Assessment 53 
Involving a Family Member 53 
Relating Your Impressions 53 

Setting Initial Goals for Treatment and Relating Your 
Treatment Plan 54 
Expectations for Treatment 56 
Devising an Initial Cognitive Conceptualization 
and Treatment Plan 57 

Structure of the First Therapy Session 

Goals and Structure of the Initial Session 59 

Setting the Agenda 60 

Doing a Mood Check 62 

Obtaining an Update 63 

Discussing the Diagnosis 65 

Problem Identihcation and Goal Setting 68 

Educating the Patient about the Cognitive Model 70 

Discussion of Problem or Behavioral Activation 74 

End-of-Session Summary and Setting of Homework 74 

Feedback 76 

Behavioral Activation 

Conceptualization of Inactivity 80 
Conceptualization of Lack of Mastery or Pleasure 81 
Using the Activity Chart to Assess the Accuracy 
of Predictions 97 

Session 2 and Beyond: Structure and Format 

The First Part of the Session 101 
The Middle Part of the Session 112 
Final Summary and Feedback 118 
Session 3 and Beyond 120 

Problems with Structuring the Therapy Session 

Therapist Cognitions 123 

Interrupting the Patient 124 

Socializing the Patient 125 

Engaging the Patient 125 

Strengthening the Therapeutic Alliance 126 

Mood Check 127 

Brief Update 129 


Contents 


XVII 


Bridge between Sessions 130 
Review of Homework 133 
Discussion of Agenda Items 133 
Setting New Homework 134 
Final Summary 135 
Feedback 135 


Chapter 9. Identifying Automatic Thoughts 

Characteristics of Automatic Thoughts 137 
Explaining Automatic Thoughts to Patients 140 
Eliciting Automatic Thoughts 142 
Teaching Patients to Identify Automatic Thoughts 


137 


155 


Chapter 10. Identifying Emotions 

Distinguishing Automatic Thoughts from Emotions 159 


158 


Difficulty in Labeling Emotions 162 

Rating Degrees of Emotion 164 

Using Emotional Intensity to Guide Therapy 


165 


Chapter 11. Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 

Selecting Key Automatic Thoughts 167 
Questioning to Evaluate an Automatic Thought 170 
Assessing the Outcome of the Evaluation Process 176 
Conceptualizing Why the Evaluation of an Automatic 
Thought Was Ineffective 176 
Using Alternate Methods to Help Patients Examine 
Their Thinking 178 
When Automatic Thoughts Are True 182 
Teaching Patients to Evaluate Their Thinking 184 
Taking a Shortcut: Not Using the Questions at All 185 

Chapter 12. Responding to Automatic Thoughts 

Reviewing Therapy Notes 188 

Evaluating and Responding to Novel Automatic Thoughts 
between Sessions 192 

Responding to Automatic Thoughts in Other Ways 197 

Chapter 13. Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 

Cognitive Conceptualization 199 
Modifying Beliefs 214 


167 


187 


198 


Chapter 14. Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 

Categorizing Core Beliefs 231 
Identifying Core Beliefs 233 
Presenting Core Beliefs 235 


228 


Contents 


Educating Patients about Core Beliefs and Monitoring 
Their Operation 235 
Developing a New Core Belief 239 
Strengthening New Core Beliefs 240 
Modifying Negative Core Beliefs 241 
The Core Belief Worksheet 242 


Chapter 15. Additional Cognitive and Behavioral Techniques 

Problem Solving and Skills Training 256 
Making Decisions 258 
Refocusing 260 

Measuring Moods and Behavior Using 
the Activity Chart 263 
Relaxation and Mindfulness 263 
Graded Task Assignments 264 
Exposure 265 
Role-Playing 267 
Using the “Pie” Technique 268 
Self-Comparisons and Credit Lists 272 

Chapter 16. Imagery 

Identifying Images 277 
Educating Patients about Imagery 279 
Responding to Spontaneous Images 280 
Inducing Imagery as a Therapeutic Tool 289 

Chapter 17. Homework 

Setting Homework Assignments 295 
Increasing Homework Adherence 299 
Conceptualizing Difficulties 308 
Reviewing Homework 315 


Chapter 18. Termination and Relapse Prevention 

Early Activities 316 
Activities Throughout Therapy 318 
Near Termination Activities 322 
Booster Sessions 327 


256 


277 


294 


316 


Chapter 19. Treatment Planning 332 

Accomplishing Broad Therapeutic Goals 333 

Planning Treatment across Sessions 333 

Greating a Treatment Plan 334 

Planning Individual Sessions 336 

Deciding Whether to Focus on a Problem 340 

Modifying Standard Treatment for Specific Disorders 344 


Contents 


XIX 


Chapter 20. Problems in Therapy 346 

Uncovering the Existence of a Problem 346 
Conceptualizing Problems 348 
Stuck Points 355 

Remediating Problems in Therapy 356 

Chapter 21. Progressing as a Cognitive Behavior Therapist 358 

Appendix A. Cognitive Case Write-Up 361 

Appendix B. Cognitive Behavior Therapy Resources 366 

Training Programs 366 

Therapist and Patient Materials and Referrals 366 
Assessment Materials 366 
Cognitive Behavior Therapy 

Professional Organizations 367 

Appendix C. Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale 368 

References 375 


Index 


381 



Chapter 1 

^90 


INTRODUCTION TO 
COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY 


A revolution in the field of mental health was initiated in the early 
1960s by Aaron T. Beck, MD, then an assistant professor in psy¬ 
chiatry at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Beck was a fully trained 
and practicing psychoanalyst. A scientist at heart, he believed that in 
order for psychoanalysis to be accepted by the medical community, its 
theories needed to be demonstrated as empirically valid. In the late 
1950s and early 1960s, he embarked on a series of experiments that 
he fully expected would produce such validation. Instead, the oppo¬ 
site occurred. The results of Dr. Beck’s experiments led him to search 
for other explanations for depression. He identified distorted, nega¬ 
tive cognition (primarily thoughts and beliefs) as a primary feature of 
depression and developed a short-term treatment, one of whose pri¬ 
mary targets was the reality testing of patients’ depressed thinking. 

In this chapter, you will find the answers to the following ques¬ 
tions: 


What is cognitive behavior therapy? 

How was it developed? 

What does research tell us about its effectiveness? 

• What are its basic principles? 

• How can you become an effective cognitive behavior therapist? 


1 



2 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


WHAT IS COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY? 

Aaron Beck developed a form of psychotherapy in the early 1960s that 
he originally termed “cognitive therapy.” “Cognitive therapy” is now 
used synonymously with “cognitive behavior therapy” hy much of our 
held and it is this latter term that will he used throughout this volume. 
Beck devised a structured, short-term, present-oriented psychotherapy 
for depression, directed toward solving current problems and modify¬ 
ing dysfunctional (inaccurate and/or unhelpful) thinking and behavior 
(Beck, 1964). Since that time, he and others have successfully adapted 
this therapy to a surprisingly diverse set of populations with a wide range 
of disorders and problems. These adaptations have changed the focus, 
techniques, and length of treatment, but the theoretical assumptions 
themselves have remained constant. In all forms of cognitive behavior 
therapy that are derived from Beck’s model, treatment is based on a 
cognitive formulation, the beliefs and behavioral strategies that charac¬ 
terize a specihc disorder (Alford & Beck, 1997). 

Treatment is also based on a conceptualization, or understanding, 
of individual patients (their specihc beliefs and patterns of behavior). 
The therapist seeks in a variety of ways to produce cognitive change— 
modihcation in the patient’s thinking and belief system—to bring 
about enduring emotional and behavioral change. 

Beck drew on a number of different sources when he developed this 
form of psychotherapy, including early philosophers, such as Epicetus, 
and theorists, such as Karen Homey, Alfred Adler, George Kelly, Albert 
Ellis, Richard Lazarus, and Albert Bandura. Beck’s work, in turn, has 
been expanded by current researchers and theorists, too numerous to 
recount here, in the United States and abroad. 

There are a number of forms of cognitive behavior therapy that 
share characteristics of Beck’s therapy, but whose conceptualizations 
and emphases in treatment vary to some degree. These include rational 
emotional behavior therapy (Ellis, 1962), dialectical behavior therapy 
(Linehan, 1993), problem-solving therapy (D’Zurilla & Nezu, 2006), 
acceptance and commitment therapy (Hayes, Eollette, & Linehan, 
2004), exposure therapy (Eoa & Rothbaum, 1998), cognitive process¬ 
ing therapy (Resick & Schnicke, 1993), cognitive behavioral analysis 
system of psychotherapy (McCullough, 1999), behavioral activation 
(Lewinsohn, Sullivan, & Grosscup, 1980; Martell, Addis, & Jacobson, 
2001), cognitive behavior modihcation (Meichenbaum, 1977), and oth¬ 
ers. Beck’s cognitive behavior therapy often incorporates techniques 
from all these therapies, and other psycho therapies, within a cognitive 
framework. Historical overviews of the held provide a rich description 
of how the different streams of cognitive behavior therapy originated 


Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 


3 


and grew (Arnkoff & Glass, 1992; A. Beck, 2005; Clark, Beck, & Alford, 
1999; Dobson & Dozois, 2009; Hollon & Beck, 1993). 

Cognitive behavior therapy has been adapted for patients with 
diverse levels of education and income as well as a variety of cultures 
and ages, from young children to older adults. It is now used in pri¬ 
mary care and other medical offices, schools, vocational programs, and 
prisons, among other settings. It is used in group, couple, and family 
formats. While the treatment described in this book focuses on individ¬ 
ual 45-minute sessions, treatment can be briefer. Some patients, such 
as those who suffer from schizophrenia, often cannot tolerate a full 
session, and some practitioners can use cognitive therapy techniques, 
without conducting a full therapy session, within a medical or rehabili¬ 
tation appointment or medication check. 


WHAT IS THE THEORY UNDERLYING 
COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY? 

In a nutshell, the cognitive model proposes that dysfunctional thinking 
(which influences the patient’s mood and behavior) is common to all 
psychological disturbances. When people learn to evaluate their think¬ 
ing in a more realistic and adaptive way, they experience improvement 
in their emotional state and in their behavior. For example, if you were 
quite depressed and bounced some checks, you might have an auto¬ 
matic thought, an idea that just seemed to pop up in your mind: “I can’t 
do anything right.” This thought might then lead to a particular reac¬ 
tion: you might feel sad (emotion) and retreat to bed (behavior). If you 
then examined the validity of this idea, you might conclude that you 
had overgeneralized and that, in fact, you actually do many things well. 
Looking at your experience from this new perspective would probably 
make you feel better and lead to more functional behavior. 

For lasting improvement in patients’ mood and behavior, cogni¬ 
tive therapists work at a deeper level of cognition: patients’ basic beliefs 
about themselves, their world, and other people. Modification of their 
underlying dysfunctional beliefs produces more enduring change. For 
example, if you continually underestimate your abilities, you might have 
an underlying belief of incompetence. Modifying this general belief 
(i.e., seeing yourself in a more realistic light as having both strengths 
and weaknesses) can alter your perception of specihc situations that 
you encounter daily. You will no longer have as many thoughts with the 
theme, “I can’t do anything right.” Instead, in specihc situations where 
you make mistakes, you will probably think, “I’m not good at this [spe¬ 
cihc task].” 


4 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


WHAT DOES THE RESEARCH SAY? 

Cognitive behavior therapy has been extensively tested since the first 
outcome study was published in 1977 (Rush, Beck, Kovacs, & Hollon, 
1977). At this point, more than 500 outcome studies have demonstrated 
the efficacy of cognitive behavior therapy for a wide range of psychiatric 
disorders, psychological problems, and medical problems with psycho¬ 
logical components (see, e.g., Butler, Chapman, Forman, & Beck, 2005; 
Chambless & Ollendick, 2001). Table 1.1 lists many of the disorders and 
problems that have been successfully treated with cognitive behavior 
therapy. A more complete list may be found at www.beckinstitute.org. 

Studies have been conducted that demonstrate the effectiveness of 
cognitive behavior therapy in community settings (see, e.g., Shadish, 
Matt, Navarro & Philips, 2000; Simons et al., 2010; Stirman, Buchhofer, 
McLaulin, Evans, & Beck, 2009). Other studies have found computer- 
assisted cognitive behavior therapy to be effective (see, e.g., Khanna 
& Kendall, 2010; Wright et al., 2002). And several researchers have 
demonstrated that there are neurobiological changes associated with 
cognitive behavior therapy treatment for various disorders (see, e.g.. 


TABLE 1.1. Partial List of Disorders Successfuliy Treated by Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy 


Psychiatric disorders 

Psychological 

problems 

Medical problems with 
psychological components 

Major depressive disorder 

Couple problems 

Chronic back pain 

Geriatric depression 

Family problems 

Sickle cell disease pain 

Generalized anxiety disorder 

Pathological gambling 

Migraine headaches 

Geriatric anxiety 

Complicated grief 

Tinnitus 

Panic disorder 

Caregiver distress 

Cancer pain 

Agoraphobia 

Anger and hostility 

Somatoform disorders 

Social phobia 


Irritable bowel syndrome 

Obsessive-compulsive 


Chronic fatigue syndrome 

disorder 


Rheumatic disease pain 

Conduct disorder 


Erectile dysfunction 

Substance abuse 


Insomnia 

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity 


Obesity 

disorder 


Vulvodynia 

Health anxiety 


Hypertension 

Body dysmorphic disorder 
Eating disorders 

Personality disorders 

Sex offenders 

Habit disorders 

Bipolar disorder (with 
medication) 

Schizophrenia (with 
medication) 


Gulf War syndrome 





Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 


5 


Goldapple et al., 2004). Hundreds of research studies have also vali¬ 
dated the cognitive model of depression and of anxiety. A comprehen¬ 
sive review of these studies can be found in Clark and colleagues (1999) 
and in Clark and Beck (2010). 


HOWWAS BECK’S COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR 
THERAPY DEVELOPED? 

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Dr. Beck decided to test the psycho¬ 
analytic concept that depression is the result of hostility turned inward 
toward the self. He investigated the dreams of depressed patients, 
which, he predicted, would manifest greater themes of hostility than 
the dreams of normal controls. To his surprise, he ultimately found 
that the dreams of depressed patients contained fewer themes of hostil¬ 
ity and far greater themes of defectiveness, deprivation, and loss. He 
recognized that these themes paralleled his patients’ thinking when 
they were awake. The results of other studies Beck conducted led him 
to believe that a related psychoanalytic idea—that depressed patients 
have a need to suffer—might be inaccurate (Beck, 1967). At that point, 
it was almost as if a stacked row of dominoes began to fall. If these 
psychoanalytic concepts were not valid, how else could depression be 
understood? 

As Dr. Beck listened to his patients on the couch, he realized that 
they occasionally reported two streams of thinking: a free-association 
stream and quick, evaluative thoughts about themselves. One woman, 
for example, detailed her sexual exploits. She then reported feeling 
anxious. Dr. Beck made an interpretation: “You thought 1 was criticiz¬ 
ing you.” The patient disagreed: “No, 1 was afraid 1 was boring you.” 
Upon questioning his other depressed patients. Dr. Beck recognized 
that all of them experienced “automatic” negative thoughts such as 
these, and that this second stream of thoughts was closely tied to their 
emotions. He began to help his patients identify, evaluate, and respond 
to their unrealistic and maladaptive thinking. When he did so, they 
rapidly improved. 

Dr. Beck then began to teach his psychiatric residents at the Uni¬ 
versity of Pennsylvania to use this form of treatment. They, too, found 
that their patients responded well. The chief resident, A. John Rush, 
MD, now a leading authority in the held of depression, discussed con¬ 
ducting an outcome trial with Dr. Beck. They agreed that such a study 
was necessary to demonstrate the efficacy of cognitive therapy to others. 
Their randomized controlled study of depressed patients, published in 
1977, established that cognitive therapy was as effective as imipramine, 
a common antidepressant. This was an astounding study. It was one 


6 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


of the first times that a talk therapy had been compared to a medica¬ 
tion. Beck, Rush, Shaw, and Emery (1979) published the hrst cognitive 
therapy treatment manual 2 years later. 

Important components of cognitive behavior therapy for depres¬ 
sion include a focus on helping patients solve problems; become 
behaviorally activated; and identify, evaluate, and respond to their 
depressed thinking, especially to negative thoughts about themselves, 
their worlds, and their future. In the late 1970s Dr. Beck and his post¬ 
doctoral fellows at the University of Pennsylvania began to study anxi¬ 
ety, and found that a somewhat different focus was necessary. Patients 
with anxiety needed to better assess the risk of situations they feared, 
to consider their internal and external resources, and improve upon 
their resources. They also needed to decrease their avoidance and con¬ 
front situations they feared so they could test their negative predictions 
behaviorally. Since that time, the cognitive model of anxiety has been 
rehned for each of the various anxiety disorders, cognitive psychology 
has verihed these models, and outcome studies have demonstrated the 
efficacy of cognitive behavior therapy for anxiety disorders (Clark & 
Beck, 2010). 

Fast-forward several decades. Dr. Beck, his fellows, and other 
researchers worldwide continue to study, theorize, adapt, and test treat¬ 
ments for patients who suffer from an ever-growing list of problems. 
Cognitive therapy or cognitive behavior therapy is now taught in most 
graduate schools in the United States and in many other countries. 


WHAT ARE THE BASIC PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT? 

Although therapy must be tailored to the individual, there are, nev¬ 
ertheless, certain principles that underlie cognitive behavior therapy 
for all patients. Throughout the book, I use a depressed patient, Sally, 
to illustrate these central tenets and to demonstrate how to use cog¬ 
nitive theory to understand patients’ difficulties and how to use this 
understanding to plan treatment and conduct therapy sessions. Sally 
is a nearly ideal patient and allows me to present cognitive behavior 
therapy in a straightforward manner. I make some note of how to vary 
treatment for patients who do not respond as well as she, but the reader 
must look elsewhere (e.g., J. S. Beck, 2005; Kuyken, Padesky & Dudley, 
2009; Needleman, 1999) to learn how to conceptualize, strategize, and 
implement techniques for patients with diagnoses other than depres¬ 
sion or for patients whose problems pose a challenge in treatment. 


“Sally” was an 18-year-old single female when she sought treatment 
with me during her second semester of college. She had been 


Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 


1 


feeling quite depressed and anxious for the previous 4 months 
and was having difficulty with her daily activities. She met criteria 
for a major depressive episode of moderate severity according to 
DSM-IV-TR (the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor¬ 
ders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision; American Psychiatric Associa¬ 
tion, 2000). A fuller portrait of Sally is provided in Appendix A. 

The basic principles of cognitive behavior therapy are as follows: 

Principle No. 1. Cognitive behavior therapy is based on an ever-evolving 
formulation of patients’ problems and an individual conceptualization of 
each patient in cognitive terms. I consider Sally’s difficulties in three time 
frames. From the beginning, I identify her current thinking that contrib¬ 
utes to her feelings of sadness (“I’m a failure, I can’t do anything right, 
I’ll never be happy”), and her problematic behaviors (isolating herself, 
spending a great deal of unproductive time in her room, avoiding ask¬ 
ing for help). These problematic behaviors both flow from and in turn 
reinforce Sally’s dysfunctional thinking. Second, I identify precipitating 
factors that influenced Sally’s perceptions at the onset of her depression 
(e.g., being away from home for the first time and struggling in her 
studies contributed to her belief that she was incompetent). Third, I 
hypothesize about key developmental events and her enduring patterns of 
interpreting these events that may have predisposed her to depression 
(e.g., Sally has had a lifelong tendency to attribute personal strengths 
and achievement to luck, but views her weaknesses as a reflection of her 
“true” self). 

I base my conceptualization of Sally on the cognitive formulation 
of depression and on the data Sally provides at the evaluation session. 
I continue to refine this conceptualization at each session as I obtain 
more data. At strategic points, I share the conceptualization with Sally 
to ensure that it “rings true” to her. Moreover, throughout therapy I 
help Sally view her experience through the cognitive model. She learns, 
for example, to identify the thoughts associated with her distressing 
affect and to evaluate and formulate more adaptive responses to her 
thinking. Doing so improves how she feels and often leads to her behav¬ 
ing in a more functional way. 

Prineiple No. 2. Cognitive behavior therapy requires a sound therapeu¬ 
tic alliance. Sally, like many patients with uncomplicated depression and 
anxiety disorders, has little difficulty trusting and working with me. I 
strive to demonstrate all the basic ingredients necessary in a counseling 
situation: warmth, empathy, caring, genuine regard, and competence. 
I show my regard for Sally by making empathic statements, listening 
closely and carefully, and accurately summarizing her thoughts and 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


feelings. I point out her small and larger successes and maintain a real¬ 
istically optimistic and upbeat outlook. I also ask Sally for feedback at 
the end of each session to ensure that she feels understood and posi¬ 
tive about the session. See Chapter 2 for a lengthier description of the 
therapeutic relationship in cognitive behavior therapy. 

Principle No. 3. Cognitive behavior therapy emphasizes eollaboration 
and aetive participation. I encourage Sally to view therapy as teamwork; 
together we decide what to work on each session, how often we should 
meet, and what Sally can do between sessions for therapy homework. At 
first, I am more active in suggesting a direction for therapy sessions and 
in summarizing what we’ve discussed during a session. As Sally becomes 
less depressed and more socialized into treatment, I encourage her to 
become increasingly active in the therapy session: deciding which prob¬ 
lems to talk about, identifying the distortions in her thinking, summa¬ 
rizing important points, and devising homework assignments. 

Principle No. 4. Cognitive behavior therapy is goal oriented and problem 
foeused. I ask Sally in our first session to enumerate her problems and 
set specific goals so both she and I have a shared understanding of what 
she is working toward. For example, Sally mentions in the evaluation 
session that she feels isolated. With my guidance, Sally states a goal in 
behavioral terms: to initiate new friendships and spend more time with 
current friends. Later, when discussing how to improve her day-to-day 
routine, I help her evaluate and respond to thoughts that interfere with 
her goal, such as: My friends won’t want to hang out with me. I’m too tired to 
go out with them. First, I help Sally evaluate the validity of her thoughts 
through an examination of the evidence. Then Sally is willing to test 
the thoughts more directly through behavioral experiments (pages 
217-218) in which she initiates plans with friends. Once she recognizes 
and corrects the distortion in her thinking, Sally is able to benefit from 
straightforward problem solving to decrease her isolation. 

Prineiple No. 5. Cognitive behavior therapy initially emphasizes the pres¬ 
ent. The treatment of most patients involves a strong focus on current 
problems and on specific situations that are distressing to them. Sally 
begins to feel better once she is able to respond to her negative think¬ 
ing and take steps to improve her life. Therapy starts with an examina¬ 
tion of here-and-now problems, regardless of diagnosis. Attention shifts 
to the past in two circumstances. One, when patients express a strong 
preference to do so, and a failure to do so could endanger the therapeu¬ 
tic alliance. Two, when patients get “stuck” in their dysfunctional think¬ 
ing, and an understanding of the childhood roots of their beliefs can 
potentially help them modify their rigid ideas. (“Well, no wonder you 


Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 


9 


still believe you’re incompetent. Can you see how almost any child— 
who had the same experiences as you—^would grow up believing she 
was incompetent, and yet it might not be true, or certainly not com¬ 
pletely true?”) 

For example, I briefly turn to the past midway through treatment 
to help Sally identify a set of beliefs she learned as a child: “Iff achieve 
highly, it means I’m worthwhile,” and “If I don’t achieve highly, it means 
I’m a failure.” I help her evaluate the validity of these beliefs both in 
the past and present. Doing so leads Sally, in part, to develop more 
functional and more reasonable beliefs. If Sally had had a personal¬ 
ity disorder, I would have spent proportionally more time discussing 
her developmental history and childhood origin of beliefs and coping 
behaviors. 

Principle No. 6. Cognitive behavior therapy is educative, aims to teaeh 
the patient to be her own therapist, and emphasizes relapse prevention. In 
our first session I educate Sally about the nature and course of her dis¬ 
order, about the process of cognitive behavior therapy, and about the 
cognitive model (i.e., how her thoughts influence her emotions and 
behavior). I not only help Sally set goals, identify and evaluate thoughts 
and beliefs, and plan behavioral change, but I also teach her how to 
do so. At each session I ensure that Sally takes home therapy notes— 
important ideas she has learned—so she can benefit from her new 
understanding in the ensuing weeks and after treatment ends. 

Prineiple No. 7. Cognitive behavior therapy aims to be time limited. 
Many straightforward patients with depression and anxiety disorders are 
treated for six to 14 sessions. Therapists’ goals are to provide symptom 
relief, facilitate a remission of the disorder, help patients resolve their 
most pressing problems, and teach them skills to avoid relapse. Sally 
initially has weekly therapy sessions. (Had her depression been more 
severe or had she been suicidal, I may have arranged more frequent 
sessions.) After 2 months, we collaboratively decide to experiment with 
biweekly sessions, then with monthly sessions. Even after termination, 
we plan periodic “booster” sessions every 3 months for a year. 

Not all patients make enough progress in just a few months, how¬ 
ever. Some patients require 1 or 2 years of therapy (or possibly longer) 
to modify very rigid dysfunctional beliefs and patterns of behavior that 
contribute to their chronic distress. Other patients with severe mental 
illness may need periodic treatment for a very long time to maintain 
stabilization. 

Prineiple No. 8. Cognitive behavior therapy sessions are structured. No 
matter what the diagnosis or stage of treatment, following a certain 


10 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


structure in each session maximizes efficiency and effectiveness. This 
structure includes an introductory part (doing a mood check, briefly 
reviewing the week, collahoratively setting an agenda for the session), a 
middle part (reviewing homework, discussing problems on the agenda, 
setting new homework, summarizing), and a final part (eliciting feed¬ 
back) . Following this format makes the process of therapy more under¬ 
standable to patients and increases the likelihood that they will be able 
to do self-therapy after termination. 

Principle No. 9. Cognitive behavior therapy teaches patients to identify, 
evaluate, and respond to their dysfunetional thoughts and beliefs. Patients 
can have many dozens or even hundreds of automatic thoughts a day 
that affect their mood, behavior, and/or physiology (the last is espe¬ 
cially pertinent to anxiety). Therapists help patients identify key cog¬ 
nitions and adopt more realistic, adaptive perspectives, which leads 
patients to feel better emotionally, behave more functionally, and/or 
decrease their physiological arousal. They do so through the process 
of guided discovery, using questioning (often labeled or mislabeled as 
“Socratic questioning”) to evaluate their thinking (rather than persua¬ 
sion, debate, or lecturing). Therapists also create experiences, called 
behavioral experiments, for patients to directly test their thinking (e.g., 
“If I even look at a picture of a spider. I’ll get so anxious I won’t be able 
to think”). In these ways, therapists engage in collaborative empiricism. 
Therapists do not generally know in advance to what degree a patient’s 
automatic thought is valid or invalid, but together they test the patient’s 
thinking to develop more helpful and accurate responses. 

When Sally was quite depressed, she had many automatic thoughts 
throughout the day, some of which she spontaneously reported and oth¬ 
ers that I elicited (by asking her what was going through her mind when 
she felt upset or acted in a dysfunctional manner). We often uncovered 
important automatic thoughts as we were discussing one of Sally’s spe¬ 
cific problems, and together we investigated their validity and utility. 
I asked her to summarize her new viewpoints, and we recorded them 
in writing so that she could read these adaptive responses throughout 
the week to prepare her for these or similar automatic thoughts. I did 
not encourage her to uncritically adopt a more positive viewpoint, chal¬ 
lenge the validity of her automatic thoughts, or try to convince her that 
her thinking was unrealistically pessimistic. Instead we engaged in a 
collaborative exploration of the evidence. 

Principle No. 10. Cognitive behavior therapy uses a variety of tech¬ 
niques to change thinking, mood, and behavior. Although cognitive strate¬ 
gies such as Socratic questioning and guided discovery are central to 
cognitive behavior therapy, behavioral and problem-solving techniques 


Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 


11 


are essential, as are techniques from other orientations that are imple¬ 
mented within a cognitive framework. For example, I used Gestalt- 
inspired techniques to help Sally understand how experiences with her 
family contributed to the development of her helief that she was incom¬ 
petent. I use psychodynamically inspired techniques with some Axis II 
patients who apply their distorted ideas about people to the therapeutic 
relationship. The types of techniques you select will be influenced by 
your conceptualization of the patient, the problem you are discussing, 
and your objectives for the session. 

These basic principles apply to all patients. Therapy does, however, 
vary considerably according to individual patients, the nature of their 
difficulties, and their stage of life, as well as their developmental and 
intellectual level, gender, and cultural background. Treatment also var¬ 
ies depending on patients’ goals, their ability to form a strong thera¬ 
peutic bond, their motivation to change, their previous experience with 
therapy, and their preferences for treatment, among other factors. 

The emphasis in treatment also depends on the patient’s particu¬ 
lar disorder(s). Cognitive behavior therapy for panic disorder involves 
testing the patient’s catastrophic misinterpretations (usually life- or 
sanity-threatening erroneous predictions) of bodily or mental sensa¬ 
tions (Clark, 1989). Anorexia requires a modihcation of beliefs about 
personal worth and control (Garner & Bemis, 1985). Substance abuse 
treatment focuses on negative beliefs about the self and facilitating or 
permission-granting beliefs about substance use (Beck, Wright, New¬ 
man, & Liese, 1993). 


WHAT IS A THERAPY SESSION LIKE? 

The structure of therapy sessions is quite similar for the various disor¬ 
ders, but interventions can vary considerably from patient to patient. 
(The website of the Academy of Cognitive Therapy [www.academyofct. 
org] posts a list of books that describe the cognitive formulation, major 
emphases, strategies, and techniques for a wide range of diagnoses, 
patient variables, and treatment formats and settings.) Below is a gen¬ 
eral description of treatment sessions and the course of treatment, 
especially for patients who are depressed. 

At the beginning of sessions, you will reestablish the therapeutic 
alliance, check on patients’ mood, symptoms, and experiences in the 
past week, and ask them to name the problems they most want help 
in solving. These difficulties may have arisen during the week and/ 
or they may be problems patients expect to encounter in the coming 
week(s). You will also review the self-help activities (“homework” or 


12 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


“action plan”) patients engaged in since the previous session. Then, in 
the context of discussing a specihc prohlem patients have put on the 
agenda, you will collect data about the prohlem, cognitively conceptu¬ 
alize patients’ difficulties (asking for their specihc thoughts, emotions, 
and behaviors associated with the problem), and collaboratively plan 
a strategy. The strategy most often includes straightforward problem 
solving, evaluating patients’ negative thinking associated with the prob¬ 
lem, and/or behavior change. 

For example, Sally, the college student, is having difficulty studying. 
She needs help evaluating and responding to her thoughts (“What’s the 
use? I’ll probably flunk out anyway”) before she is able to fully engage 
in solving her problem with studying. I make sure Sally has adopted a 
more accurate and adaptive view of the situation and has decided which 
solutions to implement in the coming week (e.g., starting with relatively 
easier tasks, mentally summarizing what she has read after every page 
or two of reading, planning shorter study sessions, going for walks when 
she takes breaks, and asking the teaching assistant for help). Our ses¬ 
sion sets the stage for Sally to make changes in her thinking and behav¬ 
ior during the coming week that, in turn, lead to an improvement in 
her mood and functioning. 

Having discussed a problem and collaboratively set therapy home¬ 
work, Sally and I turn to a second problem she has put on the agenda 
and repeat the process. At the end of the session we review important 
points from the session. I make sure that Sally is highly likely to do the 
homework assignments, and I elicit her feedback about the session. 


DEVELOPING AS A COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPIST 

To the untrained observer, cognitive behavior therapy sometimes 
appears deceptively simple. The cognitive model, the proposition that 
one’s thoughts influence one’s emotions and behavior, is quite straight¬ 
forward. Experienced cognitive behavior therapists, however, accom¬ 
plish many tasks at once: conceptualizing the case, building rapport, 
socializing and educating the patient, identifying problems, collect¬ 
ing data, testing hypotheses, and summarizing. The novice cognitive 
behavior therapist, in contrast, usually needs to be more deliberate and 
structured, concentrating on fewer elements at one time. Although the 
ultimate goal is to interweave these elements and conduct therapy as 
effectively and efficiently as possible, beginners must hrst learn the skill 
of developing the therapeutic relationship, the skill of conceptualiza¬ 
tion, and the techniques of cognitive behavior therapy, all of which is 
best done in a step-by-step manner. 

Developing expertise as a cognitive behavior therapist can be 
viewed in three stages. (These descriptions assume that the therapist 


Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 


13 


is already proficient in basic counseling skills: listening, empathy, con¬ 
cern, positive regard, and genuineness, as well as accurate understand¬ 
ing, reflection, and summarizing. Therapists who do not already possess 
these skills often elicit a negative reaction from patients.) In Stage 1 you 
learn basic skills of conceptualizing a case in cognitive terms based on 
an intake evaluation and data collected in session. You also learn to 
structure the session, use your conceptualization of a patient and good 
common sense to plan treatment, and help patients solve problems and 
view their dysfunctional thoughts in a different way. You also learn to 
use basic cognitive and behavioral techniques. 

In Stage 2 you become more proficient at integrating your con¬ 
ceptualization with your knowledge of techniques. You strengthen your 
ability to understand the flow of therapy. You become more easily able 
to identify critical goals of treatment and more skillful at conceptual¬ 
izing patients, refining your conceptualization during the therapy ses¬ 
sion itself, and using the conceptualization to make decisions about 
interventions. You expand your repertoire of techniques and become 
more proficient in selecting, timing, and implementing appropriate 
techniques. 

In Stage 3 you more automatically integrate new data into the 
conceptualization. You refine your ability to make hypotheses to con¬ 
firm or revise your view of the patient. You vary the structure and tech¬ 
niques of basic cognitive behavior therapy as appropriate, particularly 
for patients with personality disorders and other difficult disorders and 
problems. 

If you already practice in another psychotherapeutic modality, it 
will be important for you to make a collaborative decision with patients 
to introduce the cognitive behavior therapy approach, describing what 
you would like to do differently and providing a rationale. Most patients 
agree to such changes when they are phrased positively, to the patient’s 
benefit. When patients are hesitant, you can suggest the institution of 
a change (such as setting an agenda) as an “experiment,” rather than a 
commitment, to motivate them to try it. 

Therapist: Mike, I was reading an important book on making therapy 
more effective and I thought of you. 

Patient: Oh? 

Therapist: Yes, and I have some ideas about how we can help you get 
better faster, [being collaborative] Is it okay if I tell you about it? 
Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: One thing I read was called “setting the agenda.” That 
means at the beginning of sessions. I’m going to ask you tell me the 
names of problems you want my help in solving during the session. 
For example, you might say that you’re having a problem with your 


14 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


boss, or with getting out of bed on weekends, or that you’ve been 
feeling really anxious about your finances, {pause) By asking you 
the names of problems up front, we can figure out how to spend 
our time in session better, {pause) [eliciting feedback] How does 
that sound? 


HOWTO USE THIS BOOK 

This book is intended for individuals at any stage of experience and skill 
development who lack mastery in the fundamental building blocks of 
cognitive conceptualization and treatment. It is critical to have mastered 
the basic elements of cognitive behavior therapy in order to understand 
how and when to vary standard treatment for individual patients. 

Your growth as a cognitive behavior therapist will be enhanced if 
you start applying the tools described in this book to yourself. First, as 
you read, begin to conceptualize your own thoughts and beliefs. Start 
paying attention to your own shifts in affect. When you notice that your 
mood has changed or intensified in a negative direction (or when you 
notice that you are engaging in dysfunctional behavior or are experi¬ 
encing bodily sensations associated with negative affect), ask yourself 
what emotion you are feeling, as well as the cardinal question of cogni¬ 
tive behavior therapy: 


“What was just going through my mind?” 


In this way, you will teach yourself to identify your own automatic 
thoughts. Teaching yourself the basic skills of cognitive behavior ther¬ 
apy using yourself as the subject will enhance your ability to teach your 
patients these same skills. 

It will be particularly useful to identify your automatic thoughts as 
you are reading this book and trying techniques with your patients. If, 
for instance, you find yourself feeling slightly distressed, ask yourself, 
“What was just going through my mind?” You may uncover automatic 
thoughts such as: 


“This is too hard.” 

“I may not be able to master this.” 
“This doesn’t feel comfortable to me.” 
“What if I try it and it doesn’t work?” 




Introduction to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 


15 


Experienced therapists whose primary orientation has not been 
cognitive may be aware of a different set of automatic thoughts: 


“This won't work." 

“The patient won’t iike it.” 

“it’s too superficiai/structured/unempathic/simple.” 


Having uncovered your thoughts, you can note them and refocus 
on your reading, or turn to Chapters 11 and 12, which describe how to 
evaluate and respond to automatic thoughts. By turning the spotlight 
on your own thinking, not only can you boost your cognitive behavior 
therapy skills, but you can also take the opportunity to modify dysfunc¬ 
tional thoughts and positively influence your mood (and behavior), 
making you more receptive to learning. 

A common analogy used for patients also applies to the beginning 
cognitive behavior therapist. Learning the skills of cognitive behavior 
therapy is similar to learning any other skill. Do you remember learn¬ 
ing how to drive or how to use a computer? At hrst, did you feel a little 
awkward? Did you have to pay a great deal of attention to small details 
and motions that now come smoothly and automatically to you? Did 
you ever feel discouraged? As you progressed, did the process make 
more and more sense, and feel more and more comfortable? Did you 
hnally master it to the point where you were able to perform the task 
with relative ease and conhdence? Most people have had just such an 
experience learning a skill in which they are now prohcient. 

The learning process is the same for the beginning cognitive 
behavior therapist. As you will learn to do for your patients, keep your 
goals small, well-dehned, and realistic. Give yourself credit for small 
gains. Compare your progress to your ability level before you started 
reading this book, or to the time you hrst started learning about cog¬ 
nitive behavior therapy. Be cognizant of opportunities to respond to 
negative thoughts in which you unfairly compare yourself to experi¬ 
enced cognitive behavior therapists, or in which you undermine your 
conhdence by contrasting your current level of skill with your ultimate 
objectives. 

If you feel anxious about starting to use cognitive behavior therapy 
with patients, make yourself a “coping card,” an index card on which 
you have written statements that are important to remember. My psychi¬ 
atric residents often have unhelpful thoughts before they see their hrst 
outpatient. I ask them to create a card that addresses these thoughts. 
The card is individualized but generally says something such as: 



16 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 



My qoa\ is not to cure this patient today. No one expects me to. 

My goal is to establish a good working alliance, to do some problem 

solving if 1 can, and to sharpen my cognitive behavior therapy skills. 










Reading this card helps reduce their anxiety so that they can focus 
on their patients and be more effective. 

Finally, the chapters of this book are designed to be read in the 
order presented. You might be eager to skip over introductory chapters 
in order to jump to the sections on techniques. The sum of cognitive 
behavior therapy, however, is not merely the employment of cognitive 
and behavioral techniques. Among other attributes, it entails the artful 
selection and effective utilization of a wide variety of techniques based 
on one’s conceptualization of the patient. The next chapter provides 
an overview of treatment, followed by an initial chapter on conceptual¬ 
ization. Chapter 4 describes the evaluation process, and Chapters 5-8 
focus on how to structure and what to do in therapy sessions. Chapters 
9-14 describe the basic building blocks of cognitive behavior therapy: 
identifying cognitions and emotions and adaptively responding to auto¬ 
matic thoughts and beliefs. Additional cognitive and behavioral tech¬ 
niques are provided in Chapter 15, and imagery is discussed in Chap¬ 
ter 16. Chapter 17 describes homework. Chapter 18 outlines issues of 
termination and relapse prevention. These preceding chapters lay the 
groundwork for Chapters 19 and 20: planning treatment and diagnos¬ 
ing problems in therapy. Finally, Chapter 21 offers guidelines in pro¬ 
gressing as a cognitive behavior therapist. 













Chapter 2 

OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT 


T his chapter briefly describes cognitive behavior therapy treatment 
and introduces several essential streams that run through each 
therapy session. They are: 


• Developing the therapeutic relationship. 

• Planning treatment and structuring sessions. 

• Identifying and responding to dysfunctional cognitions. 

• Emphasizing the positive. 

• Facilitating cognitive and behavioral change between 
sessions (homework). 


You will also learn more about each of these elements in future 
chapters. 


DEVELOPING THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP 

It is essential to start building trust and rapport with patients from your 
first contact with them. Research demonstrates that positive alliances 
are correlated with positive treatment outcomes (Raue & Goldfried, 
1994). This ongoing process is easily accomplished with most patients 


17 



18 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


(although it can be more difficult with patients with severe mental ill¬ 
ness or those with strong Axis II pathology). To accomplish this goal, 
you will: 


• Demonstrate good counseling skills and accurate 
understanding. 

• Share your conceptualization and treatment plan. 

• Collaboratively make decisions. 

• Seek feedback. 

• Vary your style. 

• Help patients solve their problems and alleviate their distress. 


Demonstrating Good Counseling Skills 

You will continuously demonstrate your commitment to and under¬ 
standing of patients through your empathic statements, choice of 
words, tone of voice, facial expressions, and body language. As I tell my 
trainees, you strive to be a nice human being in the room with patients. 
You treat them the way you would like to be treated. You demonstrate 
empathy and accurate comprehension of their problems and ideas 
through your thoughtful questions, reflections, and statements, which 
leads to their feeling valued and understood. You will try to impart the 
following implicit (and sometimes explicit) messages, but only when 
you genuinely endorse them: 


“I care about you and value you.” 

“I want to understand what you are experiencing and help you." 
“I’m confident we can work well together and that cognitive 
behavior therapy will help.” 

“I’m not overwhelmed by your problems, even though you might 
be.” 

“I’ve helped other patients much like you.” 


If you cannot honestly endorse these messages, you may need help from 
a supervisor to respond to your automatic thoughts about the patient, 
about cognitive behavior therapy, or about yourself. 

Through the relationship, you can indirectly help depressed 
patients: 




Overview of Treatment 


19 


Feel likeable, when you are warm, friendly, and interested. 
Feel less alone, when you describe the process of working 
together as a team to solve their problems and work toward 
their goals. 

Feel more optimistic, as you present yourself as realistically 
hopeful that treatment will help. 

Feel a greater sense of self-efficacy, when you help them see 
how much credit they deserve for solving problems, doing 
homework, and engaging in other productive activities. 


A common myth about cognitive behavior therapy, held by people who 
have not read the seminal books or watched videotapes of master clini¬ 
cians, is that it is conducted in a cold, mechanical fashion. This is sim¬ 
ply inaccurate. In fact, the earliest cognitive behavior therapy manual 
(Beck et al., 1979) stressed the importance of developing a good thera¬ 
peutic relationship. 

Sharing Your Conceptualization and Treatment Plan 

You will continuously share your conceptualization with patients and 
ask them whether it “rings true.” For example, a patient may have just 
described a problem with her mother. You have questioned her to hll in 
the cognitive model. Then you conceptualize aloud, in summary form. 
“Okay, I want to make sure I understand. The situation was that your 
mother yelled at you on the phone for not calling your brother, and your 
automatic thought was, ‘She doesn’t realize how busy I am. She doesn’t 
blame him for not calling me.' These thoughts led you to feel hurt and 
angry, but you didn’t say anything back to her [behavior].... Did I get 
that right?” If your conceptualization is accurate, the patient invariably 
says, “Yes, I think that’s right.” If you are wrong, the patient usually 
says, “No, it’s not exactly like that. It’s more like ...” Eliciting patients’ 
feedback strengthens the alliance and allows you to more accurately 
conceptualize them and conduct effective treatment. 

Making Collaborative Decisions 

While you guide patients during sessions, you will also actively enlist 
their participation. You will help them prioritize the problems they want 
help in solving during a session. You will provide rationales for interven¬ 
tions and elicit their approval (“I think it may reduce your stress if you 
take a rest a couple of times a day—is it okay if we talk about that?”). 





20 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


You may suggest, and elicit their reaction to, some self-help activities 
they can try at home. You continuously act as a team. 

Seeking Feedback 

You will be continuously alert for your patients’ emotional reactions 
throughout the session, observing their facial expressions, body lan¬ 
guage, choice of words, and tone of voice. When you recognize that 
patients are experiencing increased distress, you will often address the 
issue at the time: “You look upset. What was just going through your 
mind?” You may hnd that patients express negative thoughts about 
themselves, the process of therapy, or you. As described in Chapter 8, 
it is important to positively reinforce patients for providing feedback, 
then conceptualize the problem and plan a strategy to solve it. Failure 
to identify and address patients’ negative feedback reduces their ability 
to focus on solving their real-life difficulties and feel better. They may 
even decide not to return to therapy the following week. (SeeJ. S. Beck, 
2005, for an extensive discussion of solving problems in the therapeutic 
relationship.) 

Even when you discern that your alliance with patients is strong, 
you will still elicit feedback from them at the end of sessions: “What did 
you think about the session? Was there anything that bothered you, or 
you thought I misunderstood? Is there anything you want to do differ¬ 
ently next time?” Asking these questions can strengthen the alliance 
signihcantly. You may be the hrst health or mental health professional 
who has ever asked the patient for feedback. Patients usually feel hon¬ 
ored and respected by your genuine concern for their reactions. 

Varying Your Styie 

Most patients will respond positively to you when you are warm, 
empathic, and caring. However, an occasional patient might have a neg¬ 
ative reaction. For example, a patient may perceive you as being overly 
caring or too “touchy-feely.” Watching for patients’ emotional reactions 
in the session can alert you to ask questions to elicit a problem such as 
this, so you can change how you present yourself and help the patient 
feel more comfortable working with you. 

Heiping Patients Aiieviate Their Distress 

One of the best ways to strengthen the therapeutic relationship is by 
being an effective and competent cognitive behavior therapist. Research 
has demonstrated that the therapeutic alliance becomes strengthened 


Overview of Treatment 


21 


when patients’ symptomatology is reduced (DeRubeis & Feeley, 1990; 
Feeley, DeRubeis, & Gelfand, 1999). 

In general, you will spend enough time developing the therapeu¬ 
tic relationship to engage patients in working effectively with you as a 
team, and you will use the therapeutic alliance to provide evidence to 
patients that their core beliefs are incorrect. If the alliance is sound, you 
will avoid spending additional unnecessary time in order to maximize 
the time you spend helping patients solve problems they will face in the 
coming week. Some patients, particularly those with personality disor¬ 
ders, do require a far greater emphasis on the therapeutic relationship 
and advanced strategies to forge a good working alliance (Beck, Free¬ 
man, Davis, & Associates, 2004; J. S. Beck, 2005; Young, 1999). 


PLANNING TREATMENT AND STRUCTURING SESSIONS 

A major goal of treatment is to make the process of therapy understand¬ 
able to you and the patient. You will try to conduct therapy as efficiently 
as possible, so you can alleviate the patient’s suffering as quickly as pos¬ 
sible. Adhering to a standard format (as well as teaching the tools of 
therapy to the patient) facilitates these objectives. But, as noted above, 
you will not deliver treatment in a rote or impersonal way—if you did, 
you would not be very effective. 

Most patients feel more comfortable when they know what to expect 
from therapy, when they clearly understand what you want them to do, 
when they feel that you and they are a team, and when they have a con¬ 
crete idea of how therapy will proceed, both within a session and over 
the course of treatment. You will maximize the patient’s understanding 
by explaining the general structure of sessions and then adhering (flex¬ 
ibly at times) to that structure. 

You will begin to plan treatment for a session before patients enter 
your office. You will quickly review their chart, especially their goals for 
treatment and the therapy notes and homework assignments from the 
previous session (s). As noted above, you will have a general idea of how 
you intend to structure the session. The overarching therapeutic goal is 
to improve the patient’s mood during the session and to create a plan 
so the patient can feel better and behave more functionally during the 
week. What you will do specihcally in the session will be influenced by 
patients’ symptoms, your conceptualization, the strength of the thera¬ 
peutic alliance, their stage of treatment, and, especially, the problems 
they put on the agenda. 

Your goal in the hrst part of a therapy session is to reestablish the 
therapeutic alliance and collect data so you and the patient can collab- 


22 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


oratively set and prioritize the agenda. In the second part of a session, 
you and the patient will discuss the problems on the agenda. In the con¬ 
text of solving these problems, you will teach the patient relevant cogni¬ 
tive, behavioral, problem-solving, and other skills. You will continually 
reinforce the cognitive model, help patients evaluate and respond to 
their automatic thoughts, do problem solving, and ask them to summa¬ 
rize their new understandings. 

These kinds of discussions and interventions naturally lead to 
homework assignments, which usually involve having patients remind 
themselves of their new, more realistic way of thinking about the prob¬ 
lem and implementing solutions during the week. One important ongo¬ 
ing assignment is to have patients identify and respond to their dysfunc¬ 
tional thinking throughout the week, when they notice their mood is 
getting worse, they are behaving in a dysfunctional way, and/or they are 
experiencing signihcant physiological arousal. 

In the hnal part of the session, you will elicit from patients what 
they thought were the most important points of the session, ensure 
that these ideas are written down, review (and modify if necessary) the 
homework assignments, and elicit and respond to patients’ feedback 
about the session. While experienced cognitive behavior therapists may 
deviate from this format at times, novice therapists are usually more 
effective when they follow the specihed structure. Further descriptions 
of the structure of therapy sessions appear in Chapters 5, 7, and 8. 

To structure sessions effectively, you will need to gently interrupt 
patients: “Oh, can I interrupt you for a moment? Are you saying...?” 
Strategically and skillfully interrupting patients is illustrated in later 
chapters. If you initially feel awkward with a more tightly structured 
session, you will most likely hnd that the process gradually becomes 
second nature, especially when you note the positive results. 


IDENTIFYING AND RESPONDING 
TO DYSFUNCTIONAL COGNITIONS 

An important part of nearly every therapy session is to help patients 
respond to their inaccurate or unhelpful ideas: their automatic 
thoughts, images (mental pictures), and/or underlying beliefs. You can 
identify important automatic thoughts in several ways (see Chapter 9), 
but you will usually ask a basic question when a patient is reporting a 
distressing situation or emotion, or dysfunctional behavior: 


“What is going through your mind right now?” 



Overview of Treatment 


23 


Next, you will help patients evaluate their thinking in two m^or ways: 

• You will engage in a process of guided discovery to help patients 
develop a more adaptive and reality-based perspective. 

• You will jointly design behavioral experiments to test patients’ pre¬ 
dictions whenever feasible. 

Guided Discovery 

Usually in the context of discussing a problem, you elicit patients’ cog¬ 
nitions (automatic thoughts, images, and/or beliefs). You will often 
ascertain which cognition or cognitions are most upsetting to patients, 
then ask them a series of questions to help them gain distance (i.e., see 
their cognitions as ideas, not necessarily as truths), evaluate the valid¬ 
ity and utility of their cognitions, and/or decastastrophize their fears. 
Questions such as the following are often helpful: 


“What is the evidence that your thought is true? What is the evidence 
on the other side?” 

“What is an alternative way of viewing this situation?” 

“What is the worst that could happen, and how could you cope if it 
did? What’s the best that could happen? What’s the most realistic 
outcome of this situation?” 

“What is the effect of believing your automatic thought, and what 
could be the effect of changing your thinking?” 

“If your [friend or family member] were in this situation and had the 
same automatic thought, what advice would you give him or her?” 

“What should you do?” 


As described in Chapter 11, not all these questions apply to all auto¬ 
matic thoughts, and you might often use a different line of questioning 
altogether. But these questions are a useful guide, and are illustrated in 
the following transcript, excerpted from Sally’s fourth therapy session. 
1 help Sally specify a problem that is important to her, identify and eval¬ 
uate an associated dysfunctional idea, devise a reasonable plan, and 
assess the effectiveness of the intervention. 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, you said you wanted to talk about a problem 
with finding a part-time job? 

PATIENT: Yeah. I need the money ... but I don’t know. 



24 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: {noticing that Sally looks more dysphoric) What’s going through 
your mind right now? 

PATIENT: [automatic thought] I won’t be able to handle a job. 

Therapist: [labeling her idea as a thought and linking it to her mood] 
And how does that thought make you feel? 

PATIENT: [emotion] Sad. Really low. 

Therapist: [beginning to evaluate the thought] What’s the evidence 
that you won’t be able to work? 

PATIENT: Well, I’m having trouble just getting through my classes. 

Therapist: Okay. What else? 

Patient: I don’t know... I’m still so tired. It’s hard to make myself even 
go and look for a job, much less go to work every day. 

Therapist: In a minute we’ll look at that, [suggesting an alterna¬ 
tive view] Maybe it’s actually harder for you at this point to go 
out and investigate jobs than it would be for you to go to a job that 
you already had. In any case, is there any other evidence that you 
couldn’t handle a job, assuming that you can get one? 

PATIENT: ... No, not that I can think of. 

Therapist: Any evidence on the other side? That you might be able to 
handle a job? 

PATIENT: I did work last year. And that was on top of school and other 
activities. But this year ... I just don’t know. 

Therapist: Any other evidence that you could handle a job? 

PATIENT: I don’t know.... It’s possible I could do something that doesn’t 
take much time. And that isn’t too hard. 

Therapist: What might that be? 

Patient: A sales job, maybe. I did that last year. 

Therapist: Any ideas of where you could work? 

Patient: Actually, maybe the [university] bookstore. I saw a notice that 
they’re looking for new clerks. 

Therapist: Okay. And what would be the worst that could happen if 
you did get ajob at the bookstore? 

PATIENT: I guess if I couldn’t do it. 

Therapist: And if that happened, how would you cope? 

Patient: I guess I’d just quit. 

Therapist: And what would be the best that could happen? 

Patient: Uh ... that I’d be able to do it easily. 


Overview of Treatment 


25 


Therapist: And what’s the most realistic outcome? 

Patient: It prohahly won’t he easy, especially at hrst. But I might he 
ahle to do it. 

Therapist: Sally, what’s the effect of helieving your thought, “I won’t 
he ahle to handle ajoh”? 

PATIENT: Makes me feel sad.... Makes me not even try. 

Therapist: And what’s the effect of changing your thinking, of real¬ 
izing that possibly you could work in the bookstore? 

PATIENT: I’d feel better. I’d be more likely to apply for the job. 
Therapist: So what do you want to do about this? 

Patient: Go to the bookstore. I could go this afternoon. 

Therapist: How likely are you to go? 

Patient: Oh, I guess I will. I will go. 

Therapist: And how do you feel now? 

Patient: A little better. A little more nervous, maybe. But a little more 
hopeful, I guess. 

Here Sally is easily able to identify and evaluate her dysfunctional 
thought, “I won’t be able to handle ajoh,” with standard questions. 
Many patients, though, may require far more therapeutic effort before 
they are willing to follow through behaviorally. Had Sally been hesitant, 
I might have asked her to summarize what we had discussed and then 
we may have jointly composed a coping card based on her summary, 
that might have said something such as: 


If I avoid going to the bookstore, remind myself that I probably 
could handle a Job there and I could always quit if it didn’t work out. 
It’s not a big deal. 













26 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Behavioral Experiments 

Whenever possible, you will collaboratively design experiments that 
patients can conduct right in the therapy session itself (as well as between 
sessions). Discussing the validity of patients’ ideas, as described above, 
can help them change their thinking, but the change may be signifi¬ 
cantly more profound if the cognition is amenable to a behavioral test, 
that is, if the patient can have an experience that disconfirms its valid¬ 
ity (Bennett-Levy et ah, 2004). Suitable cognitions are usually linked to 
patients’ negative predictions. A depressed patient, for example, might 
have the automatic thought, “If I try to read anything, I won’t be able 
to concentrate well enough to understand it.” You might ask the patient 
to read a short passage from a book in your office to see to what degree 
this thought is valid. An anxious patient may express the thought, “If 
I tell you about the abuse. I’ll be so upset. I’ll fall apart,” or “If I get 
anxious and my heart starts to pound. I’ll have a heart attack.” You will 
collaboratively design experiments to test these kinds of ideas. 

At the beginning of treatment, you will generally focus on situation- 
specific thoughts, which are usually amenable to change. Toward the 
middle of therapy, you will continue to work at the automatic thought 
level, but you will also focus on modifying patients’ more generalized 
cognitions: their underlying assumptions and core beliefs. (These vari¬ 
ous levels of cognition are described at length in the next chapter.) 
Treatment continues, ideally, until patients’ disorders are in remission 
and they have learned the necessary skills to prevent relapse. 


EMPHASIZING THE POSITIVE 

Most patients, especially those with depression, tend to focus unduly 
on the negative. When they are in a depressive mode, they automati¬ 
cally (i.e., without conscious awareness) and selectively attend to and 
put great emphasis on negative experience, and they either discount or 
fail to recognize more positive experience. Their difficulty in process¬ 
ing positive data in a straightforward manner leads them to develop a 
distorted sense of reality. To counteract this feature of depression, you 
will continually help patients attend to the positive. 

At the evaluation, you will elicit patients’ strengths (“What are 
some of your strengths and positive qualities?”). From the first session 
on, you will elicit positive data from the preceding week (“What posi¬ 
tive things happened since I saw you last? What positive things did you 
do?”). You will orient sessions toward the positive, helping patients have 
a better week. You will use the therapeutic alliance to demonstrate that 
you view patients as valuable human beings (“I think it’s great that you 


Overview of Treatment 


27 


talked to the teacher [of the child you were tutoring] to see whether he 
could get more help”). You will ask patients for data that is contrary to 
their negative automatic thoughts and beliefs (“What’s the [positive] 
evidence on the other side, that perhaps your automatic thought isn’t 
true?”). 

You will point out the positive data you hear as patients discuss 
problems and ask what this data means about them (“What does this 
say about you, that you got the job in the bookstore?”). You will be 
on alert for, and note aloud, instances of positive coping that patients 
may allude to throughout the session (“What a good idea, to solve the 
problem by asking Allison to study with you”). You will collaboratively 
set homework assignments with patients to facilitate their experienc¬ 
ing a sense of pleasure and achievement. Methods of conceptualizing 
and incorporating patients’ strengths as well as building resilience are 
described in Kuyken et al. (2009). 


FACILITATING COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL CHANGE 
BETWEEN SESSIONS (HOMEWORK) 

An important aim of treatment is to help patients feel better by the end 
of the session and to set them up to have a better week. To achieve this 
objective, you will: 


• Help patients evaluate and respond to automatic thoughts 
that they are likely to experience between sessions. 

• Help patients devise solutions to their problems to 
implement during the week. 

• Teach patients new skills to practice during the week. 


Because patients tend to forget much of what occurs in therapy 
sessions, it is important that anything you want them to remember be 
recorded so they can review it at home. Either you or they should write 
down their self-help assignments in a therapy notebook (which you can 
photocopy and attach to your treatment notes) or on carbonless paper 
(available from office supply stores or printers). Homework usually con¬ 
sists of: 


Behavioral changes as a result of problem solving and/or skills 
training in session (e.g., problem of isolation might lead to 
behavioral solution of calling friends; problem of being overloaded 






28 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

at work might lead to patient's assertively discussing the difficulty 
with a supervisor). 

• Identifying automatic thoughts and beliefs when patients notice a 
dysfunctional change in affect, behavior, or physiology, and then 
evaluating and responding to their cognitions through Socratic 
questioning, behavioral experiments, and/or reading therapy notes 
that address their cognitions. For example: 


If I start to think that I can’t clean up the kitchen, remind myself 
that I’m only going to do it for 10 minutes, that it may be difficult 
but probably won’t be impossible, and that the first minute or two 
will probably be the hardest, and then it’s likely to get easier. 


Homework naturally flows from the discussion of each problem, 
because the patient will have things to remember (changes in cogni¬ 
tion) and/or things to do. It is of utmost importance to plan home¬ 
work assignments carefully, crafting them for your patient based on 
your conceptualization of what will help most, along with the patient’s 
agreement. It is also essential to review homework the following week. 
An important early assignment for patients with depression is schedul¬ 
ing activities. See Chapter 6 for a detailed description of activity sched¬ 
uling and Chapter 17 for detailed guidelines in setting and reviewing 
homework. 















Chapter 3 

COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION 


A cognitive conceptualization provides the framework for under¬ 
standing a patient. To initiate the process of formulating a case, 
you will ask yourself the following questions: 


“What is the patient's diagnosis(es)?’’ 

“What are his current problems? How did these problems develop 
and how are they maintained?” 

“What dysfunctional thoughts and beliefs are associated with 
the problems? What reactions (emotional, physiological, and 
behavioral) are associated with his thinking?” 


Then you will hypothesize how the patient developed this particu¬ 
lar psychological disorder: 


“How does the patient view himself, others, his personal world, his 
future?” 

“What are the patient’s underlying beliefs (including attitudes, 
expectations, and rules) and thoughts?” 

“How is the patient coping with his dysfunctional cognitions?” 


29 






30 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


“What stressors (precipitants) contributed to the development of his 
current psychological problems, or interfere with solving these 
problems?” 

“If relevant, what early experiences may have contributed to the 
patient's current problems? What meaning did the patient glean 
from these experiences, and which beliefs originated from, or 
became strengthened by, these experiences?” 

“If relevant, what cognitive, affective, and behavioral mechanisms 
(adaptive and maladaptive) did the patient develop to cope with 
these dysfunctional beliefs?” 


You begin to construct a cognitive conceptualization during your 
first contact with a patient and continue to refine your conceptualiza¬ 
tion throughout treatment. This organic, evolving formulation helps 
you plan for efficient and effective therapy (Kuyken et ah, 2009; Needle- 
man, 1999; Persons, 2008; Tarrier, 2006). In this chapter I describe the 
cognitive model, the theoretical basis of cognitive behavior therapy. I 
then discuss the relationship of thoughts and beliefs and present the 
case example of Sally, used throughout this book. 


THE COGNITIVE MODEL 

Cognitive behavior therapy is based on the cognitive model, which hypoth¬ 
esizes that people’s emotions, behaviors, and physiology are influenced 
by their perception of events. 


Situation/event 

1 

Automatic thoughts 
1 

Reaction (emotional, behavioral, physiological) 


It is not a situation in and of itself that determines what people feel, 
but rather how they construe situation (Beck, 1964; Ellis, 1962). Imag¬ 
ine, for example, a situation in which several people are reading a basic 
text on cognitive behavior therapy. They have quite different emotional 
and behavioral responses to the same situation, based on what is going 
through their minds as they read. 






Cognitive Conceptualization 


31 


Reader A thinks, “This really makes sense. Finally, a book that will 
really teach me to be a good therapist!” Reader A feels mildly excited 
and keeps reading. 

Reader B, on the other hand, thinks, “This approach is too simplistic. 
It will never work.” Reader B feels disappointed and closes the book. 

Reader C has the following thoughts: “This book isn’t what I 
expected. What a waste of money.” Reader C is disgusted and 
discards the book altogether. 

Reader D thinks, “I really need to learn all this. What if I don’t 
understand it? What if I never get good at it?” Reader D feels anxious 
and keeps reading the same few pages over and over. 

Reader E has different thoughts: “This is just too hard. I’m so dumb. 
I’ll never master this. I’ll never make it as a therapist.” Reader E feels 
sad and turns on the television. 


The way people feel emotionally and the way they behave are asso¬ 
ciated with how they interpret and think about a situation. The situation 
itself does not directly determine how they feel or what they do\ their emotional 
response is mediated by their perception of the situation. Cognitive 
behavior therapists are particularly interested in the level of thinking 
that may operate simultaneously with a more obvious, surface level of 
thinking. 

For example, while you are reading this text, you may notice two 
levels in your thinking. Part of your mind is focusing on the informa¬ 
tion in the text; that is, you are trying to understand and integrate the 
information. At another level, however, you may be having some quick, 
evaluative thoughts. These thoughts are called automatic thoughts and 
are not the result of deliberation or reasoning. Rather, these thoughts 
seem to spring up spontaneously; they are often quite rapid and brief. 
You may barely be aware of these thoughts; you are far more likely to be 
aware of the emotion or behavior that follows. Even if you are aware of 
your thoughts, you most likely accept them uncritically, believing that 
they are true. You don’t even think of questioning them. You can learn, 
however, to identify your automatic thoughts by attending to your shifts 
in affect, your behavior, and/or your physiology. Ask yourself, “What 
was just going through my mind?” when: 



32 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


• You begin to feel dysphoric. 

• You feel inclined to behave in a dysfunctional way (or to avoid 
behaving in an adaptive way). 

• You notice distressing changes in your body or mind. 


Having identified your automatic thoughts, you can, and probably 
already do to some extent, evaluate the validity of your thinking. For 
example, if you have a lot to do, you may have the automatic thought, 
“I’ll never get it all hnished.” But you may do an automatic reality check, 
recalling past experiences and reminding yourself, “It’s okay. You know 
you always get done what you need to.” When you hnd your interpre¬ 
tation of a situation is erroneous and you correct it, you probably dis¬ 
cover that your mood improves, you behave in a more functional way, 
and/or your physiological arousal decreases. In cognitive terms, when 
dysfunctional thoughts are subjected to objective reflection, one’s emo¬ 
tions, behavior, and physiological reaction generally change. Chapter 
11 offers specihc guidelines on how to evaluate automatic thoughts. 

But where do automatic thoughts spring from? What makes one 
person construe a situation differently from another person? Why may 
the same person interpret an identical event differently at one time 
than at another? The answer has to do with more enduring cognitive 
phenomena: beliefs. 


BELIEFS 

Beginning in childhood, people develop certain ideas about them¬ 
selves, other people, and their world. Their most central or core beliefs 
are enduring understandings so fundamental and deep that they often 
do not articulate them, even to themselves. The person regards these 
ideas as absolute truths—just the way things “are” (Beck, 1987). For 
example. Reader E, who thought he was too unintelligent to master this 
text, frequently has a similar concern when he has to engage in a new 
task (e.g., learning a new skill on the computer, hguring out how to put 
together a bookcase, or applying for a bank loan). He seems to have the 
core belief, “I’m incompetent.” This belief may operate only when he is 
in a depressed state, or it may be activated much of the time. When this 
core belief is activated. Reader E interprets situations through the lens 
of this belief, even though the interpretation may, on a rational basis, 
be patently invalid. 

Reader E tends to focus selectively on information that conhrms 
his core belief, disregarding or discounting information to the con- 



Cognitive Conceptualization 


33 


trary. For example, Reader E did not consider that other intelligent, 
competent people might not fully understand the material in their hrst 
reading. Nor did he entertain the possibility that the author had not 
presented the material well. He did not recognize that his difficulty in 
comprehension could be due to a lack of concentration, rather than a 
lack of brainpower. He forgot that he often had difficulty initially when 
presented with a body of new information, but later had a good track 
record of mastery. Because his incompetence belief was activated, he 
automatically interpreted the situation in a highly negative, self-critical 
way. In this way, his belief is maintained, even though it is inaccurate 
and dysfunctional. It is important to note that he is not purposely try¬ 
ing to process information in this way; it occurs automatically. 

Figure 3.1 illustrates this distorted way of processing information. 
The circle with a rectangular opening represents Reader E’s schema. 
In Piagetian terms, the schema is a hypothesized mental structure that 
organizes information. Within this schema is Reader E’s core belief: 
“I’m incompetent.” When Reader E is presented with negative data this 
schema becomes activated, and the data, contained in negative rect¬ 
angles, are immediately processed as conhrming his core belief, which 
makes the belief stronger. 

But a different process occurs when Reader E is presented with posi¬ 
tive data (such as analyzing which health care plan would be best for his 
family). Positive data are encoded in the equivalent of positive triangles, 
which cannot ht into the schema. His mind automatically discounts the 
data (“I chose a health care plan, but it took me a long time.”) When his 
boss praised him, he immediately thought, “My boss is wrong. I didn’t 
do that project well. I didn’t deserve it [his praise].” These interpreta¬ 
tions, in essence, change the shape of the data from positive triangles 
to negative rectangles. Now the data ht into the schema and, as a result, 
strengthen the negative core belief. 

There are also positive data that Reader E just does not notice. 
He does not negate some evidence of competence, such as paying his 
bills on time or hxing a plumbing problem. Rather, he does not seem 
to process these positive data at all; they bounce off the schema. Over 
time. Reader E’s core belief of incompetence becomes stronger and 
stronger. 

Sally, too, has a core belief of incompetence. Fortunately, when 
she is not depressed a different schema (which contains the core 
belief, “Em reasonably competent”) is activated much, but not all, of 
the time. But when she is depressed, the incompetence schema pre¬ 
dominates. One important part of therapy is to help Sally view negative 
data in a more realistic and adaptive way. Another important part of 
therapy is to help her identify and process positive data in a straight¬ 
forward way. 


34 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 



FIGURE 3.1. Information-processing model. This diagram demonstrates how 
negative data are immediately processed, strengthening the core belief, while posi¬ 
tive data are discounted (changed into negative data) or unnoticed. 


Core beliefs are the most fundamental level of belief; they are global, 
rigid, and overgeneralized. Automatic thoughts, the actual words or 
images that go through a person’s mind, are situation specihc and may 
be considered the most superficial level of cognition. The following 
section describes the class of intermediate beliefs that exists between the 
two. 

































Cognitive Conceptualization 


35 


Attitudes, Rules, and Assumptions 

Core beliefs influence the development of an intermediate class of 
beliefs, which consists of (often unarticulated) attitudes, rules, and 
assumptions. Reader E, for example, had the following intermediate 
beliefs: 

Attitude'. “It’s terrible to fail.” 

Rule'. “Give up if a challenge seems too great.” 

Assumptions'. “If I try to do something difficult. I’ll fail. If I avoid 
doing it. I’ll be okay.” 

These beliefs influence his view of a situation, which in turn influ¬ 
ences how he thinks, feels, and behaves. The relationship of these 
intermediate beliefs to core beliefs and automatic thoughts is depicted 
below: 


Core beliefs 
1 

Intermediate beliefs 
(rules, attitudes, assumptions) 
1 

Automatic thoughts 


How do core beliefs and intermediate beliefs arise? People try to 
make sense of their environment from their early developmental stages. 
They need to organize their experience in a coherent way in order to 
function adaptively (Rosen, 1988). Their interactions with the world 
and other people, influenced by their genetic predisposition, lead to 
certain understandings: their beliefs, which may vary in their accuracy 
and functionality. Of particular significance to the cognitive behavior 
therapist is that dysfunctional beliefs can be unlearned, and more real¬ 
ity-based and functional new beliefs can be developed and strength¬ 
ened through treatment. 

The quickest way to help patients feel better and behave more 
adaptively is to facilitate the direct modification of their core beliefs as 
soon as possible, because once they do so, patients will tend to interpret 
future situations or problems in a more constructive way. It is possible 
to undertake belief modification earlier in treatment with patients who 
have straightforward depression and who held reasonable and adaptive 
beliefs about themselves before the onset of their disorder. But when 
patients’ beliefs are entrenched, you can lose credibility and endanger 



36 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


the therapeutic alliance if you question the validity of core beliefs too 
early. 

The usual course of treatment in cognitive behavior therapy, there¬ 
fore, involves an initial emphasis on identifying and modifying auto¬ 
matic thoughts that derive from the core beliefs (and on interventions 
that indirectly modify core beliefs). Therapists teach patients to iden¬ 
tify these cognitions that are closest to conscious awareness, and to gain 
distance from them by learning: 

• Just because they believe something doesn’t necessarily mean it 
is true. 

• Changing their thinking so it is more reality based and useful 
helps them feel better and progress toward their goals. 

It is easier for patients to recognize the distortion in their specific 
thoughts than in their broad understandings of themselves, their worlds, 
and others. But through repeated experiences in which they gain relief 
by working at a more superficial level of cognition, patients become 
more open to evaluating the beliefs that underlie their dysfunctional 
thinking. Relevant intermediate-level beliefs and core beliefs are evalu¬ 
ated in various ways and subsequently modified so that patients’ percep¬ 
tions of and conclusions about events change. This deeper modification 
of more fundamental beliefs makes patients less likely to relapse (Evans 
et al., 1992; Hollon, DeRubeis, & Seligman, 1992). 


RELATIONSHIP OF BEHAVIOR 
TO AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 

The hierarchy of cognition, as it has been explained to this point, can 
be illustrated as follows: 


Core beliefs 
1 

Intermediate beliefs (rules, attitudes, assumptions) 
1 

Situation 

1 

Automatic thoughts 
1 

Reaction (emotional, behavioral, physiological) 



Cognitive Conceptualization 


37 


In a specific situation, one’s underlying beliefs influence one’s per¬ 
ception, which is expressed by situation-specific automatic thoughts. 
These thoughts, in turn, influence one’s emotional, behavioral, and 
physiological reaction. Figure 3.2 illustrates the cognitive concep¬ 
tualization of Reader E in this particular situation, illustrating how 
his beliefs influence his thinking, which in turns influences his reac¬ 
tion. 

Note that had Reader E been able to evaluate his thinking, his emo¬ 
tions, physiology, and behavior may have been positively affected. For 
example, he may have responded to his thoughts by saying, “Wait a 
minute. This may be hard, but it’s not necessarily impossible. I’ve been 
able to understand this type of book before. If I keep at it. I’ll probably 
understand it better.” Had he responded in such a way, he might have 
reduced his sadness and kept reading. 

To summarize, this reader felt discouraged because of his thoughts 
in a particular situation. Why did he have these thoughts when another 
reader did not? Unarticulated core beliefs about his incompetence 
influenced his perception of the situation. 


Core belief: "I’m incompetent.” 

i 

Intermediate beliefs 
Attitude: “It’s terrible to fall.” 

Rule: '7 should give up if a challenge seems too great.” 
Assumptions: “If! try to do something difficult, I’ll fail. 

If I avoid doing it, I’ll be okay.” 
i 

Situation: Reading a new text 
i 

Automatic thoughts: “This is just too hard, i’m so dumb. 

I’ll never master this. TH never make it as a therapist.” 
i 

Reaction: 

Emotional: Discouragement 
Physiological: Heaviness in body 
Behavioral: Avoids task and watches television instead. 

V_ 


FIGURE 3.2. Cognitive conceptualization of Reader E. 



38 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


A More Complex Cognitive Model 

It is important to note that the sequence of the perception of situations 
leading to automatic thoughts that then influence people’s reactions is 
an oversimplihcation at times. Thinking, mood, behavior, physiology, 
and the environment all can affect one another. Triggering situations 
can he: 


• Discrete events (such as getting a low mark on a paper). 

A stream of thoughts (such as thinking about doing schoolwork 
or intrusive thoughts). 

A memory (such as getting a poor grade in the past). 

An image (such as the disapproving face of a professor). 

An emotion (such as noticing how intense one's dysphoria is). 

A behavior (such as staying in bed). 

A physiological or mental experience (such as noticing one's 
rapid heartbeat or slowed-down thinking). 


There may he a complex sequence of events with many different trig¬ 
gering situations, automatic thoughts, and reactions, as pictured in Fig¬ 
ure 3.3. 

As explained in the beginning of this chapter, it is essential for 
you to learn to conceptualize patients’ difficulties in cognitive terms 
in order to determine how to proceed in therapy—^when to work on a 
specihc problem or goal, automatic thought, belief, or behavior; what 
techniques to choose; and how to improve the therapeutic relationship. 
The basic questions to ask yourself are: 


“How did this patient end up here?” 

“What vulnerabilities were significant?” 

“How has the patient coped with her vulnerability?” 

“Did certain life events (traumas, experiences, interactions) 
predispose her to her current difficulties?” 

“What are the patient’s automatic thoughts, and what beliefs 
did they spring from?” 


It is important to put yourself in your patients’ shoes, to develop 
empathy for what they are undergoing, to understand how they are feel¬ 
ing, and to perceive the world through their eyes. Given their history 










Cognitive Conceptualization 


39 


Situation; Sally feels exhausted (physiological trigger) when she wakes up. 

i 

Automatic thought: “I’m too tired to get up. There's no use In getting out of bed. 

I don’t have enough energy to go to class or study.” 

i 

Emotion: Sadness 
i 

Physioiogicai response; Heaviness in body. 
i 

Automatic thoughts; “What if [my chemistry professor] gives a pop quiz? What 
If he won’t let me take a makeup quiz? What if this counts against my grade? 
[image of a failing mark on her transcript]” 

i 

Emotion; Anxiety 
i 

Physioiogicai response; Heart starts to beat quickly. 
i 

Situation; Notices rapid heartbeat. 
i 

Automatic thought; “My heart’s beating so fast. What’s wrong with me?” 

i 

Emotion: Increased anxiety 

i 

Physioiogicai response; Body feels tense, heart continues to beat rapidly. 

i 

Automatic thought: “Td better just stay in bed.” 
i 

Emotion: Relief 
i 

Physioiogicai response: Tension and heart rate reduce. 
i 

Behavior; Stays in bed. 

Saiiy eventuaiiy gets up, arrives at ciass 20 minutes after it started, then has a 
host of automatic thoughts about being iate and missing part of the iecture. 

V_^_y 

FIGURE 3.3. Complex cognitive model sequence. 


and set of beliefs, their perceptions, thoughts, emotions, and behavior 
should make sense. 

It is helpful to view therapy as a journey, and the conceptualization 
as the road map. You and the patient discuss the goals of therapy, the 
final destination. There are a number of ways to reach that destina¬ 
tion: for example, by main highways or back roads. Sometimes detours 
change the original plan. As you become more experienced and better 
at conceptualization, you fill in the relevant details in the map, and 



40 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


your efficiency and effectiveness improve. At the beginning, however, 
it is reasonable to assume that you may not accomplish therapy in the 
most effective or efficient way. An accurate cognitive conceptualization 
aids you in determining what the main highways are and how best to 
travel. 

Conceptualization begins at the hrst contact with patients and is 
rehned at every subsequent contact. You make hypotheses about patients, 
based not just on the cognitive formulation of the case, but also on the 
specihc data patients present. You conhrm, disconhrm, or modify your 
hypotheses as patients present new data. The conceptualization, there¬ 
fore, is fluid. At strategic points, you will directly check your hypotheses 
and formulation with patients. Generally, if the conceptualization is on 
target, patients conhrm that it “feels right”—they agree that the picture 
the therapist presents truly resonates with them. 

Sally, for example, suffered from persistent sadness, anxiety, and 
loneliness. As part of her intake evaluation, I elicited a sampling of 
her automatic thoughts. I asked Sally when she generally was most dis¬ 
tressed—in which situations or times of day. Sally replied that she felt 
worst at bedtime, as she lay in bed, trying to fall asleep. Having ascer¬ 
tained that the previous night was a typical example, I asked the key 
question: “What was going through your mind last night, as you were 
lying in bed, trying to fall asleep?” Sally replied, “I’ll never be able to 
hnish my term paper. I’ll probably flunk out of here. I’ll never be able 
to make anything of myself.” Sally also reported an image, an automatic 
thought in a pictorial form, which flashed through her mind. She saw 
herself, weighed down by a heavy backpack, trudging aimlessly down the 
street, looking quite downtrodden, directionless, and desperate. During 
the course of therapy, I rounded out my conceptualization. I organized 
my thinking through the use of a Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram 
(page 200) and a Cognitive Case Write-Up (Appendix A). 

Sally’s Core Beliefs 

As a child, Sally tried to make sense of herself, others, and her world. 
She learned through her own experiences, through interactions with 
others, through direct observation, and through others’ explicit and 
implicit messages to her. Her perceptions were also undoubtedly influ¬ 
enced by her genetic inheritance. Sally had a highly achieving older 
brother. As a young child, she perceived that she could not do anything 
as well as her brother and started to believe, although she did not put it 
into words, that she was incompetent and inferior. She kept comparing 
her performance to that of her brother and invariably came up lacking. 
She frequently had thoughts such as: “I can’t draw like Robert can.” “He 


Cognitive Conceptualization 


41 


rides his bike better than I do.” “I’ll never be as good a reader as he is. 
He does everything better than I do.” 

Not all children with older siblings develop these kinds of dys¬ 
functional beliefs. But Sally’s ideas were reinforced by her mother, who 
frequently criticized her: “You did a terrible job straightening up your 
room. Can’t you do anything right?” “Your brother got a good report 
card. But you? You’ll never amount to anything.” Sally, like most chil¬ 
dren, placed enormous stock in her mother’s words, believing that her 
mother was correct about nearly everything. So when her mother criti¬ 
cized her, implying or directly stating that Sally was incompetent, Sally 
believed her. 

At school, Sally also compared herself to her peers. While she was 
an above-average student, she compared herself only to the best stu¬ 
dents, again coming up short. She had thoughts such as: “I’m not as 
good as they are.” “I’ll never be able to understand all this as well as 
they can.” So the idea that she was incompetent and inferior was rein¬ 
forced. 

Without recognizing that she was doing so, Sally often screened out 
or discounted positive information that contradicted these ideas. When 
she got a high mark on a test, she would tell herself, “The test was easy.” 
When she learned ballet and became one of the better dancers in the 
group, she thought, “I’ll never be as good as my teacher.” She usually 
made negative interpretations, thereby conhrming her dysfunctional 
beliefs. For example, when her mother yelled at her for getting a B on 
a test, she thought, “Mom’s right. I am stupid.” She consistently inter¬ 
preted negative events as demonstrating her shortcomings. In addition, 
when she experienced positive events such as winning an award, she 
often discounted them: “I was just lucky. It was a fluke.” 

This process led to Sally’s developing a negative core belief about 
herself. Sally’s negative beliefs were not rock solid, however. Her father, 
although he traveled for business and was home only intermittently, 
was generally encouraging and supportive. When he taught her to hit 
a baseball, for example, he would praise her efforts. “That’s good ... 
good swing ... you’re getting it... keep going.” Some of Sally’s teachers, 
too, praised her performance in school. Sally also had positive experi¬ 
ences with friends. She saw that if she tried hard, she could do some 
things better than her friends could—baseball, for example. So Sally 
also developed a counterbalancing positive belief that she was compe¬ 
tent in at least some ways. 

Sally’s core beliefs about her world and about other people were, 
for the most part, positive and functional. She generally believed that 
other people were well-intentioned, and she perceived her world as 
being relatively safe, stable, and predictable. 


42 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Again, Sally’s core beliefs about herself, others, and her world were 
her most basic beliefs, which she had never really articulated until she 
entered treatment. As a teenager, her more positive core beliefs were 
dominant until she became depressed, and then her highly negative 
core beliefs became activated. 

Sally’s Attitudes, Rules, and Assumptions 

Somewhat more amenable to modification than her core beliefs were 
Sally’s intermediate beliefs. These attitudes, rules, and assumptions 
developed in the same way as core beliefs, as Sally tried to make sense 
of her world, of others, and of herself. Mostly through interactions with 
her family and significant others, she developed the following attitudes 
and rules: 


“I should be great at everything I try." 
“I should always do my best.” 

“It’s terrible to waste your potential." 


As was the case with her core beliefs, Sally had not fully articulated 
these intermediate beliefs. But the beliefs nevertheless influenced her 
thinking and guided her behavior. In high school, for example, she 
did not try out for the school newspaper (although it interested her) 
because she assumed she could not write well enough. She felt both 
anxious before exams, thinking that she might not do well, and guilty, 
thinking that she should have studied more. 

When her more positive core beliefs predominated, however, she 
saw herself in a more positive light, although she never completely 
believed that she was competent. She developed the assumption “If I 
work hard, I can overcome my shortcomings and do well in school.’’ 
When she became depressed, however, Sally did not really believe this 
assumption any longer and substituted the belief, “Because of my deh- 
ciencies. I’ll never amount to anything.’’ 

Sally’s Coping Strategies 

The idea of being incompetent had always been quite painful to Sally, 
and she developed certain behavioral strategies to cope or compen¬ 
sate for what she saw as her shortcomings. As might be gleaned from 
her intermediate beliefs, Sally worked hard at school and at sports. She 
overprepared her assignments and studied quite hard for tests. She also 
became vigilant for signs of inadequacy and redoubled her efforts if she 



Cognitive Conceptualization 


43 


failed to master something at school. She rarely asked others for help 
for fear they would recognize her inadequacy. 

Sally’s Automatic Thoughts 

While Sally did not articulate these core beliefs and intermediate 
beliefs (until therapy), she was at least somewhat aware of her auto¬ 
matic thoughts in specihc situations. In high school, for example 
(during which time she was not depressed), she tried out for the girls’ 
softball and hockey teams. She made the softball team and thought, 
“That’s great. I’ll get Dad to practice batting with me.” When she failed 
to make the hockey team she was disappointed, but not particularly 
self-critical. 

In college, however, Sally became depressed during her freshman 
year. Later, when she considered playing an informal softball game with 
students in her dorm, her depression influenced her thinking: “I’m no 
good. I probably won’t even be able to hit the ball.” Similarly, when she 
got a C on an English literature examination, she thought, “I’m so stu¬ 
pid. I’ll probably fail the course. I’ll never be able to make it through 
college.” 

To summarize, in her nondepressed high school years, Sally’s more 
positive core beliefs were activated, and she had relatively more positive 
(and more realistic) thoughts. In her freshman year in college, however, 
her negative beliefs predominated during her depression, which led 
her to interpret situations quite negatively and to have predominantly 
negative (and unrealistic) thoughts. These distorted thoughts also led 
her to behave in self-defeating ways, which led to automatic thoughts 
about her behavior. Instead of interpreting her avoidance as a symp¬ 
tom of depression, she thought, “I’m a basket case,” which then led to 
increased dysphoria and maladaptive behavior. 

Sequence Leading to Sally’s Depression 

How did Sally became depressed? Depression is caused by a variety of 
biopsychological and psychosocial factors. Sally may have had a genetic 
predisposition toward developing depressogenic beliefs. Not all nega¬ 
tive events, however, led her to feel dysphoric. She was able to get along 
until her innate vulnerability, influenced by the presence of negative 
beliefs, was challenged by a series of matching stressors (the “diathesis- 
stress” model; Beck, 1967). 

When Sally began college, she had several experiences that she 
interpreted in a highly negative fashion. One such experience occurred 
the hrst week. She had a conversation with other freshmen in her dorm 
who were relating the number of advanced placement courses and 


44 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

exams they had taken that had exempted them from several basic fresh¬ 
man courses. Sally, who had no advanced placement credits, began to 
think how superior these students were to her. In her economics class, 
her professor outlined the course requirements and Sally immediately 
thought, “I won’t be able to do the research paper.” She had difficulty 
understanding the hrst chapter in her chemistry text and she thought, 
“If I can’t even understand Chapter I, how will I ever make it through 
the course?” 

Sally’s beliefs made her vulnerable to interpreting events in a nega¬ 
tive way. She did not question her thoughts, but rather accepted them 
uncritically. As the weeks went on, Sally began to have more and more 
negative thoughts about herself and began to feel more and more dis¬ 
couraged and sad. She began to spend an inordinate amount of time 
studying, although she did not accomplish a great deal because of 
decreased concentration. She continued to be highly self-critical, and 
even had negative thoughts about her depressive symptoms: “What’s 
wrong with me? I shouldn’t feel this way. Why am I so down? I’m just 
hopeless.” She withdrew somewhat from new friends at school and 
stopped calling her old friends for support. She discontinued running 
and swimming and other activities that had previously provided her 
with a sense of accomplishment. Thus she experienced a paucity of 
positive inputs. Eventually, her appetite decreased, her sleep became 
disturbed, and she became enervated and listless. Sally’s perception of 
and behavior in the circumstances at the time facilitated the expression 
of a biological and psychological vulnerability to depression. 

Conceptualizing a patient in cognitive terms is crucial to determin¬ 
ing the most efficient and effective course of treatment. It also aids in 
developing empathy, an ingredient that is critical in establishing a good 
working relationship with the patient. In general, the questions to ask 
when conceptualizing patients are: 


“How did the patient come to develop this disorder?” 

“What were significant life events, experiences, and interactions?” 

“What are the patient’s most basic beliefs about himself, his world, 
and others?” 

“What are the patient’s assumptions, expectations, rules, and 
attitudes (intermediate beliefs)?" 

“What strategies has the patient used throughout life to cope with 
these negative beliefs?” 

“Which automatic thoughts, images, and behaviors help to maintain 
the disorder?” 





Cognitive Conceptualization 


45 


“How did the patient's developing beliefs interact with life situations 
to make the patient vulnerable to the disorder?” 

“What is happening in the patient's life right now and what are the 
patient's perceptions?” 


Again, conceptualization begins at the first contact and is an ongo¬ 
ing process. You base your hypotheses on information you have col¬ 
lected from the patient, using the most parsimonious explanations and 
refraining from interpretations and inferences not clearly based on 
actual data. You will check out the conceptualization with patients at 
strategic points to ensure that it is accurate, as well as to help patients 
understand themselves and their difficulties. Your conceptualization is 
always subject to modification as you continually uncover new data that 
will lead you to confirm, refine, or discard your previous hypotheses. 
The ongoing process of conceptualization is emphasized throughout 
this book; Chapter 14 illustrates further how historical events shape 
patients’ understanding of themselves and their worlds. 





Chapter 4 

THE EVALUATION SESSION 


I n this chapter, you will learn about the goals and structure for this 
session. You will learn how to conduct the assessment, relate your ten¬ 
tative diagnosis, develop initial treatment goals, and shape the patient’s 
expectations for treatment. You will also learn what to do following the 
evaluation session, including devising a tentative cognitive conceptual¬ 
ization of the patient. 

Effective cognitive behavior therapy requires you to evaluate 
patients thoroughly, so you can accurately formulate the case, concep¬ 
tualize the individual patient, and plan treatment. While there is over¬ 
lap among treatments for various disorders, there are important varia¬ 
tions as well, based on the key cognitions and behavioral strategies of 
a particular disorder. Attention to the patient’s presenting problems, 
current functioning, symptoms, and history helps you develop an ini¬ 
tial conceptualization and formulate a general therapy plan. Even if 
a patient has been evaluated by a different clinician, you will need to 
supplement the evaluation with additional data collection. There are a 
number of tasks to accomplish in your hrst contact with a patient, other 
than establishing the patient’s diagnosis. 

Assessment is not limited to this hrst meeting with a patient, how¬ 
ever. You will continue to collect assessment data at each session to 
conhrm, change, or add to your diagnosis and conceptualization. It is 
possible to miss a diagnosis at intake if patients deliberately withhold 
information (some patients with substance abuse problems or ego-syn¬ 
tonic eating disorders may do this) or inadvertently fail to report impor¬ 
tant data. Or you might erroneously attribute certain symptoms (e.g.. 


46 


The Evaluation Session 


A1 


social isolation) to a particular disorder (depression), when another 
disorder is also present (social phohia). When another clinician has 
performed the evaluation, you will undoubtedly need to collect addi¬ 
tional information pertinent to the use of cognitive behavior therapy as 
the treatment modality. 


GOALS OF THE ASSESSMENT SESSION 

In addition to correctly diagnosing patients, the assessment helps you: 


• Formulate the case and create an initial cognitive conceptualization 
of the patient. 

• Determine whether you will be an appropriate therapist. 

Determine whether you can provide the appropriate “dose” of 
therapy (e.g., if you are able to provide only weekly therapy but the 
patient requires a day program). 

Determine whether adjunctive treatment or services (such as 
medication) may be indicated. 

• Initiate a therapeutic alliance with the patient (and with family 
members, if relevant). 

Begin to socialize the patient into the structure and process of 
therapy. 

Identify important problems and set broad goals. 


It is desirable to collect as much information as possible before you 
see the patient for the hrst time. Request that patients send, or arrange 
to have sent, relevant reports from current and previous clinicians, 
including both mental health and health professionals. The evaluation 
session itself will require less time if patients are able to hll out ques¬ 
tionnaires and self-report forms beforehand. It is especially important 
that patients have had a recent medical checkup. Occasionally patients 
suffer from organic problems, not psychological ones. For example, 
hypothyroidism can be mistaken for depression. 

Inform the patient during the initial phone call that it is often use¬ 
ful to have a family member, partner, or trusted friend accompany the 
patient to session to provide additional information and/or to learn 
how he or she can be helpful to the patient. Make sure patients under¬ 
stand that the evaluation will help you determine whether they are good 
candidates for cognitive behavior therapy and whether you believe you 
will be able to provide the needed treatment. 



48 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


STRUCTURE OF THE ASSESSMENT SESSION 

In this session, you will: 


Greet the patient. 

Collaboratively decide with the patient whether a family 
member should attend all, part, or none of the session. 
Set the agenda and convey appropriate expectations 
for the session. 

Conduct the assessment. 

Set initial broad goals. 

Elicit feedback from the patient. 


STARTING THE EVALUATION SESSION 

Before patients enter your office, review whatever records they have 
brought and the forms they have completed. It is usually desirable to 
meet with patients alone at hrst. Then you can discuss whether an 
accompanying family member (if there is one) should attend the ses¬ 
sion. It is often helpful to bring this person in at least toward the end of 
the session, as you convey your initial impressions, including tentative 
diagnosis, and review broad therapy goals. You can ask for the family 
member’s perspective on the patient’s problems and, if advisable, set 
the scene for the family member to return at some point to learn what 
he or she can do to be more helpful to the patient. 

Next, let the patient know what to expect from this initial appoint¬ 
ment. 

Therapist: Sally, as I explained on the phone, this is our evaluation 
session. It’s not a therapy session, so we won’t work on solving your 
problems today. We’ll start doing that next time. Today, I need to 
ask you a lot of questions [providing a rationale] so I can determine 
your diagnosis. Some of the questions will be relevant. A number 
won’t be, but I need to ask them so I can rule in the problems you 
do have and rule out the problems you don’t have. Is that okay? 
Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: I will probably need to interrupt you sometimes today, so I 
can get the information I need. If it bothers you, would you let me 
know? 



The Evaluation Session 


49 


Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Before we begin, I’d like to tell you what I expect to cover 
today, [setting the agenda] I’d like to find out a lot about symptoms 
you’ve been experiencing and how you’ve been functioning lately, 
and also about your history. Then I’ll ask you to tell me anything 
else you think I should know. Then we’ll set some broad goals for 
treatment. I’ll tell you what my initial impressions are and what I 
think we should focus on in treatment. I’ll ask you how that sounds. 
And at the end. I’ll see whether you have any other questions or 
concerns, [being collaborative] Does that sound okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Anything else you want to cover today? 

Patient: I was hoping you could help me figure out what to do about 
school. I’m so far behind. 

Therapist: {making a note) Let me write that down. I don’t know 
whether there will be time today, but we can definitely get to it next 
time, at our first treatment session. 


THE ASSESSMENT PHASE 

You will need to know about many areas of the patient’s current and 
past experience to develop a sound treatment plan (across sessions), 
plan treatment within sessions, develop a good therapeutic relation¬ 
ship, guide the patient in setting goals, and generally carry out effective 
treatment. These areas include: 


• Patient demographics. 

• Chief complaints and current problems. 

• History of presenf illness and precipitating events. 

• Coping strategies (adaptive and maladaptive), current and 
historical. 

• Psychiatric history, including kinds of psychosocial treatments 
(and perceived helpfulness of fhese treatments), hospitalizations, 
medication, suicide attempts, and current status. 

• Substance use history and current status. 

• Medical history and current status. 

• Family psychiatric history and current status. 

• Developmental history. 





50 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


• General family history and current status. 

• Social history and current status. 

• Educational history and current status. 

• Vocational history and current status. 

• Religious/spiritual history and current status. 

• Strengths, values, and adaptive coping strategies. 


While a detailed account of assessment procedures and instruments are 
beyond the scope of this book, many sources can help, including Ant¬ 
ony and Barlow (2010); Dobson and Dobson (2009); Kuyken and col¬ 
leagues (2009); Lazarus and Lazarus (1991); Ledley, Marx, and Heim- 
berg (2005). It is also critical to determine the degree to which patients 
might be suicidal. Wenzel, Brown, and Beck (2008) provide assessment 
and practice guidelines for suicidal patients. 

Another important part of the evaluation is asking how patients 
spend their time. Asking patients to describe their typical day gives you 
additional insight into their daily experience and facilitates setting spe¬ 
cific goals at the first treatment session. As they describe a typical day, 
look for: 


• Variations In their mood. 

• Whether and how they interact with family, friends, 
and people at work. 

• How they are generally functioning at home, work, 
and elsewhere. 

• How they spend their free time. 


You will also probe for what they are not doing and what they are actively 
avoiding. 

Therapist: Sally, I’d like to get an idea of what your daily routine is 
like. Can you tell me what you do from the time you wake up in the 
morning until the time you go to sleep at night? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: What time do you wake up? 

Patient: (Sighs.) Well, I usually wake up around 5 o’clock. 

Therapist: Then what do you do? 






The Evaluation Session 


51 


PATIENT: Usually I toss and turn for a couple of hours at least. 

Therapist: What time do you get out of hed for the day? 

Patient: It depends. I usually stay in hed until the last minute. I have 
class at 9 o’clock 3 days a week, so I get up at 8:30, 8:40, something 
like that. 

Therapist: And on the other days? 

Patient: I don’t have to get up that early. So I usually stay in hed till I 
get hungry for breakfast. 

Therapist: So you have breakfast at... ? 

Patient: Sometimes 10 o’clock. Sometimes noon. 

Therapist: Is that a change from last semester? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I used to get up by 9 at the latest. 

Therapist: What do you do after breakfast? 

Patient: I usually hang out in my dorm room. Watch television. Maybe 
try to do some reading for class. But I usually can’t concentrate. So 
I stop doing it. Sometimes I fall asleep. 

Therapist: What else do you do in the afternoon? 

PATIENT: Most days I have class from 1 to 4. 

Therapist: Do you go? Have you missed any classes? 

Patient: No, I go. But it’s really hard to sit there. Sometimes I just 
space out. 

Therapist: What do you do after class? 

Patient: Go back to my room. 

Therapist: And then what? 

Patient: It depends. 

Therapist: What do you sometimes do? 

Patient: Usually I try to study a little. But sometimes I end up surhng 
the Web or falling asleep or watching TV. 

Therapist: What do you do for dinner? 

PATIENT: I go to the cafeteria with someone from my dorm. 

Therapist: What do you do after that? 

Patient: It depends. Usually go back to my room. I try to do some 
work. Sometimes I can and sometimes I can’t. I try for a little while 
and then I mostly watch TV. 

Therapist: And then? 

Patient: I get in bed around 11, 11:30. 


52 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Do you fall asleep right away? 

Patient: Not usually. It takes me about an hour. 

Therapist: And then you sleep through until 5? 

Patient: Yes. 

This description helps me pinpoint difficulties we will probably need 
to address: difficulty sleeping, napping, irregular schedule, social isola¬ 
tion, limited opportunities for mastery (a sense of accomplishment), 
trouble concentrating, falling behind in schoolwork, too much TV 
watching. Because Sally, like most depressed patients, has focused on 
the problems she encounters, I also ask her about positive experiences 
and adaptive coping strategies. (“Sally, what are the better parts of the 
day for you?”; “It sounds like you were pretty tired. How did you get 
yourself to go to class?”) 

Collecting data in this way guides my thinking in developing an 
initial treatment plan. I’ll also use the information in the hrst session 
when we set goals for treatment and do activity scheduling. In addition, 
I will ask Sally for a description of what she does on a typical weekend, 
when she doesn’t have the structure of attending classes. 

Throughout the assessment phase, you will be alert for indications 
that the patient is unsure about committing to treatment. For example, 
as Sally describes her current symptoms, she expresses hopeless think¬ 
ing. I use her automatic thought to subtly relate the cognitive model, 
indicate how it will be a target of treatment in the future, and ensure 
that our tentative alliance hasn’t suffered. 

PATIENT: It feels like I’ve got so many problems. I don’t think anything 
can help. 

Therapist: Okay, that’s an interesting thought: “I don’t think anything 
can help.” How does that thought make you feel? Sad? Hopeless? 
Patient: Both. 

Therapist: This is exactly the kind of depressed thought that we’ll be 
talking about starting next week. We’ll need to hnd out whether 
that thought is 100% true, 0% true, or someplace in the middle. 
Meanwhile, is there anything I said or did that makes you think I 
can’t help, or this kind of treatment can’t help? 

It is important to structure the patient’s responses to collect the 
data you need. Providing a guideline can help: 

Therapist: For the next few questions, I just need you to [answer “yes,” 
“no,” or “Tm not sure”] or [answer in one or two sentences]. 


The Evaluation Session 


53 


When patients start to provide unneeded details or go off on a tangent, 
it is important to gently interrupt: 

Therapist: Sorry to interrupt, but I need to know ... 


FINAL PART OF THE ASSESSMENT 

Toward the end of the assessment, it is useful to ask patients whether 
there is anything else that is important for you to know. An important 
follow-up question is: “Is there any thing you’re reluctant to tell me? You 
don’t have to tell me what it is. I just need to know whether there’s more 
to tell, maybe at some point in the future.” 


INVOLVING A FAMILY MEMBER 

If family members have accompanied patients to the office, you might 
now ask patients whether they would like to invite them into the session 
(unless, of course, they have been there from the beginning). Make 
sure there is nothing the patient wants you to refrain from saying to the 
family member. Elicit the patient’s permission to: 


Inquire what the family member thinks is most important for 
you to know; if he or she focuses only on the negative, ask about 
the patients’ positive qualities, strengths, and coping strategies. 
Go over your initial impressions. 

Present your tentative treatment plan. 


RELATING YOUR IMPRESSIONS 

Explain to patients that you will need time to review your notes, their 
forms, and previous reports to establish their diagnosis. Eor most cases 
of depression and anxiety, it is appropriate to give your initial impres¬ 
sions of their diagnosis and show them how you will confirm the diagno¬ 
sis by using the DSM, a diagnostic manual listing psychiatric disorders 
and their symptoms. It may or may not help, at this initial encounter, 
to tell patients they have a severe mental illness or personality disorder. 
Instead, it may be more prudent to summarize the problems and symp¬ 
toms the patient is experiencing. 




54 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

SETTING INITIAL GOALS FOR TREATMENT 
AND RELATING YOUR TREATMENT PLAN 

Setting goals and relating a treatment plan help provide patients with 

hope. 

Therapist: If it’s okay, I’d like to spend a few minutes talking about 
your goals for treatment, and how I think treatment will go. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: {Writes “Goals” at the top of a sheet of paper.) Goals are really 
just the flip side of problems. We’ll set more specihc goals next ses¬ 
sion, but very broadly, should we say: Reduce depression? Reduce 
anxiety? Do better at school? Get back to socializing? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: {Jots these down.) Now I’d like to tell you how I think you’re 
going to get better and then I want to hear how it sounds to you. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Starting next week, we’re going to work toward your goals. 
At every session. I’ll ask you what problems you want my help in 
solving. For example, next week you might say, “I’m still having 
trouble getting my schoolwork done,” which relates to your goal 
of doing better at school. Then we’ll do some problem solving. We 
might hgure out ways to improve your concentration, to get your¬ 
self on a study schedule, and to get help from other people if you 
need it. {pause) Does that sound okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: And we’ll also look for depressed thinking that might get 
in the way. For example, earlier in the session you said, “I’m such 
a failure,” and you told me how depressed you feel when you have 
thoughts like that. Do you see how that idea can sap your motiva¬ 
tion to study? How it can make you feel terrible? How you might 
then curl up in bed instead of going to the library? 

Patient: Yeah, that’s what happens. 

Therapist: So one thing we’ll do together is evaluate thoughts like 
that. What’s the evidence you’re a failure? Any evidence that you’re 
not a failure? Is there another way of looking at this situation, for 
example, that you’re depressed and need some help in problem 
solving, but that doesn’t mean you’re a failure? 

Patient: Hmm. 

Therapist: So we’ll help you change your depressed and anxious 
thinking to make it more realistic, and we’ll come up with solu- 


The Evaluation Session 


55 


tions to your problems that you can try out during the rest of the 
week. And you’ll learn skills that you can use for the rest of your 
life, so you can continue solving your problems and think more 
realistically, and act in ways that can get you to your goals, [eliciting 
feedback] How does that sound? 

PATIENT: It makes sense. 

Therapist: Sally, that’s how we find people get better, by making small 
changes in their thinking and behavior every day. [eliciting feed¬ 
back] Now, was there anything I said that didn’t sound good? 

PATIENT: [expressing another automatic thought] I just don’t know if 
it will work. 

Therapist: Well, I don’t have a crystal ball, so I can’t give you a 100% 
guarantee. But there’s nothing you’ve told me that makes me think 
it won’t work, {pause.) Are you willing to give it a try? Do you want 
to come back next week? 

Patient: Yes, I do. 

Q: What if... patients express concern about the treatment plan? 

A: First, positively reinforce them for expressing their skepticism or 
misgivings (“It’s good you told me that”). Next, you will need to 
collect more data by asking, “What makes you think this treatment 
won’t work?” and “What do you think would help more?” Based 
on the patient’s answers, you will conceptualize the problem in 
cognitive terms and plan a strategy. For example, when patients 
believe your treatment won’t help because past treatments have 
been ineffective, you can ask whether they felt they had a good 
therapeutic alliance with their previous therapists and whether, at 
every session, their therapists: 

• Set agendas. 

• Figured out with them what they could do to have a better 
week. 

• Wrote down what patients wanted to remember to say to them¬ 
selves when they had depressed thinking. 

• Taught them specifically how to evaluate their thinking and 
change their behavior. 

• Asked for feedback to make sure therapy was on the right 
track. 

Most patients have not experienced this kind of treatment, 
and you can say, “I’m glad to hear that, because it sounds as if our 
treatment here will be different. If it were exactly the same as your 
past experiences, I’d be less hopeful.” 


56 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Q: What if... patients reply that a previous therapist has engaged in 
all the above activities at every session? 

A: In this case, you will need to spend more time hnding out precisely 
what occurred, especially whether the therapist provided treat¬ 
ment individualized for the patient and his specihc disorder (s), 
based on the latest research and practice guidelines. In any case, 
you can encourage the patient to give your treatment a try for a 
few sessions and indicate that you will then jointly review whether 
the treatment seems to be working. 


EXPECTATIONS FOR TREATMENT 

At this session, you will give patients a general sense of how long they 
should expect treatment to take. Usually it is best to suggest a range, 
2-4 months for many patients with straightforward m^or depression, 
although some might be able to terminate sooner (or might have to, due 
to financial constraints or insurance limitations). Other patients, par¬ 
ticularly those with chronic psychiatric disorders, or those who want to 
work on problems related to a personality disorder, may remain in treat¬ 
ment for a year or more. And patients with severe mental illness may need 
more intensive treatment when they are more highly symptomatic, and 
periodic booster sessions for a very long time (along with medication). 

Most patients progress satisfactorily with weekly sessions unless 
they are severely depressed or anxious, suicidal, or clearly in need of 
more support. Toward the end of treatment, you may gradually space 
sessions further apart to give patients more opportunities to solve prob¬ 
lems, make decisions, and use their therapy tools independently. 

In the following transcript, I give Sally an idea of how I expect 
therapy will proceed. 

Therapist: If it’s okay with you, Sally, we’ll plan to meet once a week 
until you’re feeling significantly better, then we’ll move to once 
every 2 weeks, then maybe once every 3 or 4 weeks. We’ll decide 
bow to space out therapy together. Even when we decide to end. I’ll 
recommend that you come back for a “booster” session once every 
few months for a while. How does that sound? 

Patient: Fine. 

Therapist: It’s hard to predict now how long you should be in therapy. 
My best guess is somewhere around 8 to 14 sessions. If we find that 
you have some long-standing problems that you want to work on, 
it could take longer. Again, we’ll decide together seems to be 
best. Okay? 


The Evaluation Session 


bl 


Between the Evaluation and First Therapy Session 

Before the first therapy session, you will write up your evaluation report 
and initial treatment plan. If you have obtained consent, you will con¬ 
tact the patient’s previous mental health and health professionals to 
request reports, ask questions, and obtain additional information. You 
will also contact relevant current professionals to discuss your hndings 
and coordinate care. Conversations by phone can reveal important 
information that had not been documented in writing. You will also 
start to devise a tentative cognitive conceptualization. 


DEVISING AN INITIAL COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION 
AND TREATMENT PLAN 

You will synthesize the information you gleaned from the evaluation to 
develop an initial cognitive conceptualization, informed by the cogni¬ 
tive formulation (the basic beliefs and behavioral patterns) associated 
with the patient’s diagnosis. You will hypothesize about the develop¬ 
ment of the patient’s disorder. 


“Were there important early life events that led to the 
development of negative core beliefs?” 

“What are the patient’s core beliefs?” 

“What precipitated the disorder?” 

“Did the patient put an adverse construction on certain 
precipitating events?” 

“How do the patient’s thinking and behavior contribute 
to the maintenance of the disorder?” 


You will then use the conceptualization to develop a broad treatment 
plan. 

Pulling together what I had learned from the evaluation, I hypoth¬ 
esized that Sally was vulnerable to seeing herself as incompetent (a 
belief that developed as a result of interactions with her parents, sibling, 
and some teachers). When she entered college, Sally began to perceive 
herself as unable to meet the new demands of school and independent 
living. She began to develop a generalized sense of incompetence; that 
is, a core belief of incompetence became activated. She began to have 
many automatic thoughts across situations about the likelihood that 
she would fail. These thoughts led her to feel sad, anxious, and hope¬ 
less. She was affected behaviorally, as well. She began to give up, spend- 



58 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


ing too much time alone in her room. She failed to persist in doing 
assignments she viewed as difficult, and she began to fall behind in 
her schoolwork. She saw her difficulties as an innate flaw, and not as 
the result of depression. A paucity of pleasure and mastery activities 
increased her dysphoria (see Appendix A). 

Understanding the cognitive model of depression and being famil¬ 
iar with the major treatment strategies for depression, I developed a 
more specihc treatment plan than the simplihed one I had presented 
to Sally. I hypothesized that I would initially need to focus on the fol¬ 
lowing: helping her solve academic and daily living problems; encour¬ 
aging her to become much more active; and teaching her to identify, 
evaluate, and modify her inaccurate or unhelpful negative thinking, 
especially thoughts associated with failure and incompetence (since 
she had expressed those ideas). I hypothesized that we would work 
more directly on her core belief of incompetence toward the middle 
of treatment, but I did not yet know whether it would be important to 
include a focus on the historic antecedents to her belief. I also did not 
know at this point whether Sally had dysfunctional beliefs associated 
with unlovability or worthlessness (see Chapter 14) that we would have 
to modify; she had not provided data to support the existence of these 
beliefs at the evaluation. I planned to emphasize relapse prevention in 
the hnal part of treatment. I continued to rehne this basic treatment 
plan throughout therapy as I got to know Sally and the nature of her 
difficulties better. 


Chapter 5 

^90 


STRUCTURE OF THE FIRST 
THERAPY SESSION 


I n this chapter, you will learn how to structure the initial session, 
including how to: 


• Discuss the patient’s diagnosis. 

• Do a mood check. 

Set goals. 

Start working on a problem. 

• Set homework. 

• Elicit feedback. 


Most patients feel comfortable when you tell them how and why 
you would like to structure sessions. Doing so demystihes the process of 
therapy and keeps treatment on track. Chapter 6 focuses on an essen¬ 
tial component for depressed patients: initiating behavioral activation. 
Chapter 7 describes the common structure for subsequent sessions, and 
Chapter 8 discusses problems in structuring sessions. 


GOALS AND STRUCTURE OF THE INITIAL SESSION 

Before the hrst session, you will review the patient’s intake evaluation 
and you will keep your initial conceptualization and treatment plan 


59 



60 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


in mind as you conduct the session, being prepared to change course 
if need be. Most standard cognitive behavior therapy sessions last for 
about 45-50 minutes, but the brst one often takes an hour. Your goals 
for the brst session are to: 


Establish rapport and trust with patients, normalize their 
difficulties, and instill hope. 

Socialize patients into treatment by educating them about their 
disorder(s), the cognitive model, and the process of therapy. 

• Collect additional data to help you conceptualize the patient. 
Develop a goal list. 

Start solving a problem important to the patient (and/or get the 
patient behaviorally activated). 


To accomplish these goals, you will use the following format: 


Initial Part of Session 1 

1. Set the agenda (and provide a rationale for doing so). 

2. Do a mood check. 

3. Obtain an update (since the evaluation). 

4. Discuss the patient's diagnosis and do psychoeducation. 

Middle Part of Session 1 

5. Identify problems and set goals. 

6. Educate the patient about the cognitive model. 

7. Discuss a problem. 

End of Session 1 

8. Provide or elicit a summary. 

9. Review homework assignment. 

10. Elicit feedback. 


SETTING THE AGENDA 

As this is the brst session, you will begin by greeting the patient and set¬ 
ting the agenda. Doing so frequently reduces patients’ anxieties, as they 
quickly bnd out what to expect. You will provide a rationale and make 
sure the patient agrees with the topics you propose. (In future sessions. 




structure of the First Therapy Session 


61 


you will set the agenda sometime in the initial part of the session, but 

not necessarily at the very beginning.) 

Therapist: Sally, I’m glad you came in today. Is it all right if we start off 
by deciding what we’re going to talk about today? It’s what we call 
“setting the agenda.” We’ll do this at the beginning of every ses¬ 
sion [providing a rationale] so we make sure we have time to cover 
what’s most important to you. I have a list of things I’d like to go 
over today, and then [being collaborative] I’ll ask you what you’d 
like to add. Is that okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Our hrst session will be a little different from future ses¬ 
sions, because we have a lot of ground to cover and we need to get 
to know each other better. Here’s what I’d like to go over. First, in 
a couple of minutes [alerting Sally that I don’t want to dive into a 
topic before setting a complete agenda]. I’d like to check on how 
you’ve been feeling, hnd out what’s happened since the evaluation, 
and talk a little about your diagnosis, {pause) Then I’d like to set 
some more specihc goals. Does that sound okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Along the way, we might hgure out some things for you to 
do before we meet again, [behavioral activation] especially making 
some changes in your schedule. And at the end. I’ll ask you what 
you thought about the session, [eliciting feedback] How does that 
sound? 

Patient: Fine. 

Therapist: Is there anything you want to add to the agenda today? 

PATIENT: Well, I know I should be doing more. But I’m so tired. It’s just 
so hard to concentrate on my work and go out with friends. I end 
up spending a lot of time sleeping or watching TV and ... 

Therapist: {gently interrupting Is it okay if I interrupt you for a moment? 
How about if I put “doing more things” on our agenda, and we’ll 
try to get to it today? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: {jotting down this agenda item) You’ll notice that I tend to 
write down a lot of things during our session, [providing a ratio¬ 
nale] I want to make sure to remember what’s important... Okay, 
anything else even more important for the agenda today? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: If you think of other important things as we go along, just 
let me know. 


62 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Ideally, setting the agenda is quick and to the point. Explaining the 
rationale for why you want to set an agenda makes the process of ther¬ 
apy more understandable to patients and elicits their active participa¬ 
tion in a structured, productive way. 

Q: What if ... patients express a strong preference to spend therapy 
time in another way? 

A: Patients occasionally, though infrequently, balk at the agenda you 
present for this first session. This might happen for several rea¬ 
sons. You may have presented the agenda in too controlling a 
fashion, without being collaborative. There may be pressing issues 
on their mind for which they desperately want immediate help in 
the session. They might prefer to spend the session talking freely 
about whatever comes in their mind, without structure or inter¬ 
ruption. 

What do you do? Above all, you need to engage patients so 
they will return to treatment for the next session. If you judge that 
trying to persuade patients to adhere to your agenda will endan¬ 
ger their engagement, especially in this first session, you might 
offer to split the therapy time. If they demur, you can spend the 
session doing what they want. At the next session, you will find 
out whether doing so helped alleviate their suffering significantly 
during the week. If not, they may be more motivated to spend at 
least part of the session discussing what you think is important to 
help them feel better. 


DOING A MOOD CHECK 

Having set the agenda, you will next do a brief mood check. In addition 
to asking Sally for a brief narrative report of her mood since I saw her 
last, I quickly review the symptom checklists she hlled out just prior to 
the session (see Appendix B for information about the Beck Depres¬ 
sion Inventory, Anxiety Inventory, and Hopelessness Scale). Because I 
initially just want a brief overview of her mood, I cue her to provide me 
with an answer in just a few words. 

Therapist: Okay, next. Can we start with how you’ve been doing this 
week? I’d like to see the forms you hlled out. While I look them 
over, [providing a guideline] can you tell me in a sentence or two 
how you felt for most of the week? 

PATIENT: I’ve been really depressed the whole time. 


structure of the First Therapy Session 


63 


Therapist: (looking over the forms) It looks as if you’ve been feeling 
pretty anxious, too, is that right? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: [being collaborative] If it’s okay with you. I’d like you to 
come to every session a few minutes early so you can fill out these 
three forms, [providing a rationale] They help give me a quick idea 
of how you’ve been feeling in the past week, although I’ll always 
want you to describe how you’ve been doing in your own words, 
too. 

Patient: Okay. 

In this first session, as in every session, I note the summed scores of the 
objective tests, comparing them to the scores from the evaluation. I 
also quickly scan individual items to determine whether the tests point 
out anything of particular importance. I especially note items related 
to hopelessness and suicidality on the Beck Depression Inventory-II. If 
these items are elevated, I will do a risk assessment (Wenzel et ah, 2008) 
to determine whether we need to spend the next part of the session 
developing a plan to keep the patient safe. 

Q: What if... patients cannot or will not fill out objective tests? 

A: If you do not have access to symptom checklists, if they are inap¬ 
propriate for patients (e.g., patients aren’t sufficiently literate), or 
if they express reluctance about completing them, you can teach 
them, at this initial session or at the next session, to rate their 
mood on a 0-10 scale: “Can you think back over the past week? 
If 0 means not depressed at all, and 10 means the most depressed 
you’ve ever been, what has your depression been like for most 
of the week?” Or you can ask patients, “Can you tell me about 
your depression this week? Would you say it was mild, moderate, 
or severe? How did your mood compare to other weeks?” Other 
problems related to doing a mood check are discussed in Chap¬ 
ter 8. 


OBTAINING AN UPDATE 

In the next part of the session, you will question patients to discover 
whether there are any important problems or issues that they have not 
yet mentioned that might take priority in the session. Then you will 
probe for positive experiences the patient had during the week. 


64 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Next, what happened between the evaluation and now 
that’s important for me to know? 

PATIENT: (Thinks.) Well, my parents have been putting pressure on me 
to figure out what I’m going to do this summer. 

Therapist: [collecting data about the problem to establish whether it’s 
of immediate importance and of high priority] Has this been really 
upsetting to you? 

PATIENT: (Sighs.) Not that much. It’s just one more thing. 

Therapist: Is this something you want my help with? 

PATIENT: Yes, I guess so. 

Therapist: We don’t have a lot of time today. Do you think we could 
postpone talking about it until another time? 

PATIENT: That’s okay. 

Therapist: I’ll put it at the bottom of my notes, and ask you next week 
how high a priority it is for you. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Was there anything else that was really important this 
week? 

PATIENT: No, I guess not. It was pretty much the same as last week. 

By asking these questions, I find out that there is not an important 
problem that needs to take priority over what is already on the agenda, 
so I can move ahead. 

How do you decide which problems are pressing and which are 
not? You will establish how distressed the patient is by the problem and 
whether the patient really needs to solve it immediately (e.g., not solv¬ 
ing it could put the patient or others in harm’s way, or endanger the 
patient’s livelihood or living situation). Discussion of most problems, 
especially chronic ones (such as difficulty functioning at home or argu¬ 
ments with family members), can usually be postponed to a future ses¬ 
sion so you can cover what you need to in this initial session. 

Q: What if... there had been a pressing agenda item? 

A: There are several reasons for deviating from the usual structure 
in the first session. 

1. If patients are at risk or they are putting others at risk. 

2. If patients are so distressed by a problem that they cannot 
focus on the topics that you want to cover. 

3. If you assess that patients will be so upset by not discuss- 



structure of the First Therapy Session 


65 


ing the problem that the therapeutic relationship could be 
impaired, and/or that the patient is likely not to come back 
for another session. 

When you ask patients for an update early in treatment, they invari¬ 
ably report only negative experiences. You then ask, “What positive 
things happened this week?” or “When were some times that you felt 
even a little bit better this week?” These questions help patients see real¬ 
ity more clearly, as the depression has undoubtedly led them to focus 
almost exclusively on the negative. 


DISCUSSING THE DIAGNOSIS 

In the next part of the session, you will briefly review patients’ present¬ 
ing problems and ask them to bring you up to date: 

Therapist: Sally, I’d like to discuss what I found out in the evaluation 
session last week. Is it okay if we talk for a few moments about your 
diagnosis? 

Most patients want to know their general diagnosis, and to establish 
that you don’t think they are strange or abnormal. Usually it is prefer¬ 
able to avoid the label of a personality disorder diagnosis. Instead it 
is better to say something more general and jargon free, such as, “It 
looks as if you’ve been pretty depressed for the last year and you’ve 
had some long-standing problems with relationships and with work.” 
It’s also desirable to give patients some initial information about their 
condition so they can start attributing some of their problems to their 
disorder instead of to their character (“There’s something wrong with 
me. I’m just no good.”) The following transcript illustrates how to edu¬ 
cate patients who are depressed. 

Therapist: The evaluation shows that you have a moderate depres¬ 
sion. I want you to know that it’s a real illness. It’s not the same as 
people saying, “Oh, I’m so depressed” when they’re feeling down. 
You have a real depression. 

Patient: (Sighs.) 

Therapist: I know that because you have the symptoms in this diag¬ 
nostic manual (showing Sally IheDSM). For each mental health dis¬ 
order, this manual lists the symptoms, just as a neurology diagnos¬ 
tic manual would list the symptoms of a migraine. 


66 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: Oh, I didn’t know that. 

Therapist: [providing hope] Fortunately, cognitive behavior therapy 
is very effective in helping people overcome depression. 

PATIENT: I was afraid you’d think I was crazy. 

Therapist: Not at all. [normalizing] You have a fairly common condi¬ 
tion, and it sounds as though you have a lot of the same problems 
as most of our patients here. But that’s typical of how people with 
depression think. How do you feel now that you’ve found out I don’t 
think you’re crazy? 

PATIENT: (Sighs.) Relieved. 

Therapist: That’s a lot of what we’ll be doing in treatment. Identifying 
your depressed thinking and helping you see things more realisti¬ 
cally. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: [anticipating that Sally might blame herself for thinking in 
an unrealistic way] Now, it’s not your fault that you have this kind of 
negative thinking. It’s a primary symptom of depression. For every¬ 
one with depression, it’s as if they’re seeing themselves and their 
worlds and the future [the “cognitive triad” of depression] through 
eyeglasses covered with black paint. (Ipantomime painting an imagi¬ 
nary pair of glasses on my face.) These dark glasses make everything 
look dark and hopeless. Part of what we’ll do in therapy is to scrape 
off the black paint (pantomiming) so you can see things more real¬ 
istically ... Is that clear? [Using an analogy often helps the patient 
to see her situation in a different way.] 

PATIENT: Yeah. I understand. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s go over some of the other symptoms of depres¬ 
sion that you have. I see from the evaluation that the depression 
is interfering with your sleep and your energy. It sounds as if it’s 
also affecting your motivation to do things, [normalizing] Now, 
most depressed people start criticizing themselves for not being 
the same as they had been before, [eliciting specihc incidents] Do 
you remember any recent times you’ve criticized yourself? 

PATIENT: (Sighs.) Yeah. Lately I’ve been getting out of bed late and not 
getting my work done, and I think I’m lazy and no good. 

Therapist: Now, if you had pneumonia, and had trouble getting out 
of bed and getting everything done, would you call yourself lazy 
and no good? 

PATIENT: No, I guess not. 

Therapist: Would it help this week if you answered back the thought, 
“I’m lazy and no good”? 


structure of the First Therapy Session 


67 


Patient: Probably. 

Therapist: Wbat could you remind yourself? [Eliciting a response 
rather than just providing one fosters active participation and a 
degree of autonomy.] 

PATIENT: I guess that I am depressed, and it’s harder for me to do 
things. 

Therapist: Good. It’s going to be really important for you to remem¬ 
ber that this week. Would you like me to write it down? Or would 
you like to? 

Patient: You can. 

Therapist: {pulling out a piece of carbonless paper [see Figure 5.1]) Okay, 
I’ll date this paper at the top. Now what should we call this: your 
therapy homework? Your action plan? 

PATIENT: Homework, I guess. 

Therapist: Good. {Writes “Homework” at the top.) The first item is to read 
something about what we just discussed. I’ll write down, “If I start 
thinking I’m lazy and no good, remind myself that I have a real ill¬ 
ness, called depression, that makes it harder for me to do things.” 
{pausing and anticipating that this statement could lead to hopelessness) 
Is it okay if I write down another reminder? “As the treatment starts 
to work, my depression will lift, and things will get easier.” 


f \ 

Jan. 22 

Homework: 

Read this list twice a day; set an alarm to remember. 

1. It I start thinking I'm lazy and no good, remind myself that I have a real 
illness, called depression, that makes it harder for me to do things. As the 
treatment starts to work, my depression will lift, and things will get easier. 

2. Read goal list and add others, if I think of any. 

3. When I notice my mood getting worse, ask myself, “What’s going through 
my mind right now?” and jot down the thoughts. Remind myself that just 
because I think something, doesn’t necessarily mean it's true. 

4. Make plans with Allison and Joe. Remember, if they say no, it’s likely that 
they’d like to hang out with me but they’re too busy. 

5. Read Coping with Depression booklet (optional). 

V_^^_ 


FIGURE 5.1. Sally ’s first-session homework list. 



68 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Q: What if... the patient negates the analogy? 

A: Some patients say, “Yes, but pneumonia is a biological disease.” A 
good reply to this includes the specihc depressive symptoms the 
patient has been experiencing: “Depression is biological, too; it’s a 
real disease with real symptoms. Now, just feeling sad or down is 
not an illness. But that’s not Just what you’ve been experiencing. 
You’ve been feeling sad and down and hopeless; you’ve been self- 
critical, hardly anything interests you any more, you’ve been with¬ 
drawing from activities; your sleep and energy have been affected. 
That’s how I know you have a real illness, every bit as real as pneu¬ 
monia.” 

Many patients benefit from another homework assignment: Read¬ 
ing a specific chapter in a cognitive behavior therapy book on depres¬ 
sion for consumers (see www.academyofct.org), or a booklet sucb as Cop¬ 
ing with Depression (see www.beckinstitute.org), will reinforce important 
ideas from this session. Ask patients to make mental or written notes 
about what they agree with, disagree with, or have questions about. 


PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION 
AND GOAL SETTING 

Next you will focus on identifying specific problems. As a logical exten¬ 
sion, you will help patients turn these problems into goals to work on 

in treatment. 

Therapist: Now, let’s review the problems you’ve been having. 

PATIENT: (Sighs.) Oh, I don’t know. Everything is such a mess. I’m doing 
terribly at school. I’m way behind. I feel so tired and down all the 
time. I feel sometimes like I should just give up. 

Therapist: (questioning to make sure Sally is not actively suicidal) Have you 
had any thoughts of harming yourself? 

PATIENT: No, not really. I just wish all my problems would somehow go 
away. 

Therapist: (empathically) It sounds like you’re feeling overwhelmed? 

PATIENT: Yes, I don’t know what to do. 

Therapist: [helping Sally to focus and to break down her problems 
into a more manageable size] Okay, it sounds like you have two 
major problems right now. One is that you’re not doing well at 
school. The other is that you feel really tired and down. Are there 
any others? 


structure of the First Therapy Session 


69 


PATIENT: Well, like I told you last week, I know I’m alone in my room 
too much. I should be spending more time with my friends. 

Therapist: [getting Sally to participate more actively in the goal-set- 
ting process] Okay, let’s turn these problems into goals. Would you 
like to write them down, or should I? 

Patient: You can. 

Therapist: Okay, {writing as they go along) Now, the hrst thing you 
mentioned was improving your schoolwork. Then you mentioned 
decreasing your worry about tests and grades and spending more 
time with friends. Good. Now what other goals do you have? How 
would you like to be different? Or how would you like your life to 
be different as a result of treatment? 

PATIENT: {pausing) I’d like to be happier. 

Therapist: [reinforcing the patient] That’s a good goal. 

This goal, however, is too broad. It’s difficult to hgure out how to help 

the patient become happier, so I ask Sally to specify in behavioral terms 

what being “happier” means to her. 

Therapist: And if you were happier and not feeling depressed, what 
would you be doing? 

PATIENT: I guess I would get involved in some activities at school, like 
I did last year ... I’d have some fun and not feel so depressed all 
the time. 

Therapist: Good, I’ll add these to the list: join school activities and do 
more fun activities. 


Goal List—February 1 

1. Improve schoolwork. 

2. Decrease worrying about tests and grades. 

3. Spend more time with friends. 

4. Join school activities. 

5. Do more fun activities. 


Therapist: Now, for homework, could you read through this list and 
see whether you have any other goals to add? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: {Adds this assignment to theHomeivork List.) Okay, now before 
we go on, can I quickly summarize what we’ve done so far? We’ve set 
the agenda, talked about your diagnosis, and started a goal list. 





70 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


In this part of the session, I made sure that the goal list was recorded 
in writing. I also guided Sally in specifying a general goal (“I’d like to be 
happier”) in behavioral terms. Rather than allowing a discussion of goals 
to dominate the session, I ask Sally to refine the list for homework. Finally, 
I summarized what we had discussed to that point. Doing so helps make 
the process of therapy more understandable and keeps us on track. 

Q: What if... a patient sets goals for someone else? 

A: Occasionally patients state a goal over which they do not have 
direct control: “I’d like my partner to be nicer to me”; “I want my 
boss to stop putting so much pressure on me”; “I want my kids to 
listen to me.” In this case, it is important to help them phrase the 
goal so that it is something they do have control over: 

Therapist: I don’t want to promise you that we can directly get Joe 
to be nicer to you. What do you think of phrasing it this way: 
“Learn new ways of talking to Joe.” Maybe if you take control 
and change what you’re doing, it will have some impact on 
Joe. 

For a fuller discussion of what to do when patients set goals for 
others, seej. S. Beck (2005). 


EDUCATING THE PATIENT 
ABOUT THE COGNITIVE MODEL 

An important feature of the initial session is helping patients under¬ 
stand how their thinking affects their reactions, preferably using their 
own examples. You can take advantage of patients’ spontaneous utter¬ 
ances in session (e.g., “I can’t do anything right. Nothing can help. I’ll 
never feel better”). Or you can ask them, “What’s going through your 
mind right now?” when you notice a shift in affect. It is probably easier, 
though, for the novice therapist to devote a portion of the first session 
providing psychoeducation about the relationship among triggering 
situations, automatic thoughts or images, and reactions (emotional, 
behavioral, and physiological). 

Therapist: Can we talk for a few minutes about how your thinking 
affects your mood? Can you think of any time in the past few days 
when you noticed your mood change? When you were aware that 
you had become particularly upset? 

Patient: I think so. 


structure of the First Therapy Session 


71 


Therapist: Can you tell me a little about it? 

Patient: I was having lunch with a couple of people from my Eng¬ 
lish class, and I started to feel really bad. They were talking about 
something the professor had said in class that I didn’t really under¬ 
stand. 

Therapist: Do you remember what you were thinking? 

PATIENT: Ummm, that they’re much smarter than I am. That I’ll prob¬ 
ably flunk the course. 

Therapist: {using Sally’s precise words) So you had the thoughts “They’re 
much smarter than I am. I’ll probably flunk the course,” and how 
did those thoughts make you feel emotionally? Happy, sad, wor¬ 
ried, angry... ? 

Patient: Oh, sad, really sad. 

Therapist: Okay, how about if we make a diagram? You just gave a 
good example of how, in a specific situation, your thoughts influ¬ 
ence your emotion. {Composes the diagram below and reviews it with 
Sally.) Is it clear to you? That how you viewed this situation led to 
automatic thoughts that then then influenced how you felt? 

Patient: I think so. 


Situation: At lunch with classmates 
1 

Automatic thoughts: “They're much smarter than I am. 
I’ll probably flunk the course." 

1 

Reaction (emotional): Sad 


Therapist: Let’s see if we can gather a couple more examples from the 
past few days. Is there another time when you were feeling particu¬ 
larly upset? 

PATIENT: Well, just a few minutes ago, when I was waiting in the waiting 
room. I was feeling really down. 

Therapist: And what was going through your mind at the time? 

PATIENT: I don’t remember exactly. 

Therapist: [trying to make the experience more vivid in Sally’s mind] 
Can you imagine yourself back in the waiting room right now? Can 
you imagine sitting there? Describe the scene for me as if it’s hap¬ 
pening right now. 

PATIENT: Well, I’m sitting in the chair near the door, away from the 







72 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


receptionist. A woman comes in, she’s smiling and talking to the 
receptionist. She looks kind of happy and ... normal. 

Therapist: And how are you feeling as you look at her? 

Patient: Kind of sad. 

Therapist: What’s going through your mind? 

PATIENT: She’s not like me. She’s happy. I’ll never be like that again. 

Therapist: [reinforcing the cognitive model] Okay. That’s another 
good example. The situation was that you saw a happy-looking 
woman in the reception area and you thought, “I’ll never be like 
that again”—and that thought made you feel sad. Is this clear to 
you? 

PATIENT: Yeah. I think so. 

Therapist: [making sure Sally can verbalize her understanding of the 
cognitive model] Can you tell me in your own words about the con¬ 
nection between thoughts and feelings? 

PATIENT: Well, it seems that my thoughts affect how I feel. 

Therapist: Yes, that’s right, [facilitating Sally’s carrying through the 
work of the therapy session throughout the week] What I’d like 
you to do, if you agree, is to keep track this coming week of what’s 
going through your mind when you notice your mood changing or 
getting worse. Okay? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: In fact, how about if I write it down on the Homework 
List: When I notice my mood getting luorse, ask, “What’s going through my 
mind ? ” and jot down the thoughts. When you come in next week, we 
can evaluate your thoughts to see whether they’re 100% true, or 
0% true, or someplace in the middle. Okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Lots of times, because you’re depressed, I think you’ll hnd 
that these thoughts aren’t completely accurate. I’ll write something 
down about that, too: Just because I think something doesn’t necessarily 
mean it’s true. When we hnd out your thoughts aren’t true, or not 
completely true. I’ll teach you how to look at the situation in a more 
realistic way. When you do that, I think you’ll hnd that you feel bet¬ 
ter. For example, we might hnd that your classmates aren’t much 
smarter than you, and that the reason you’re struggling has noth¬ 
ing to do with your intelligence, but has everything to do with the 
fact that you’re depressed. And we might then do some problem 
solving to help you with the course. For example, you might ask for 
help from a friend or a teaching assistant or a tutor. 


structure of the First Therapy Session 


73 


PATIENT: That sounds hard. 

Therapist: That’s another good example of an automatic thought: 
“That sounds hard.” Well, that’s what I’m here for. We’ll be working 
as a team, together, to help you solve your problems, and we’ll go 
step by step, {pause) Can you see how changing your thinking and 
doing some problem solving might help improve your mood? 
Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: (Using an encouraging tone of voice.) And I think you’ll hnd 
that you’ll get good at it pretty soon. Meanwhile, can you try to 
write down other depressed thoughts like that so we can look at 
them next session? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: [checking to see whether Sally anticipates difficulties that 
might require advance problem solving] Do you think you’ll have 
any trouble doing that? 

PATIENT: No. I think I’ll be able to. 

Therapist: Good. But even if you can’t, that’s okay. You’ll come back 
next week and we’ll work on it together. 

Patient: Okay. 

In this section, I explain, illustrate, and record the cognitive model with 
the patient’s own examples. I try to limit my explanations to just a couple 
of sentences at a time; depressed patients, in particular, have difficulty 
concentrating. I also ask Sally to put what I’ve said in her own words so 
I can check on her understanding. Had Sally’s cognitive abilities been 
impaired or limited, I might have used more concrete learning aids 
such as faces with various expressions to illustrate emotions, and car¬ 
toon characters with empty “thought bubbles” above their heads. 

Q: What if... patients have difficulty grasping the cognitive model in 
the first session? 

A: You will decide whether to try other techniques (see Chapter 9), or 
whether to return to this task in the next session. Common sense 
dictates that you not push too hard, which could lead patients to 
have negative thoughts about their competence or aboutyou. Ifyou 
decide against further explication of the cognitive model at this 
point, take care to downplay the importance of the skill to reduce 
the probability that patients will blame themselves. (“Sometimes 
it’s hard to figure out these thoughts. Usually they’re so quick. It’s 
no big deal, though. We’ll come back to it another time.”) 


74 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


DISCUSSION OF PROBLEM 
OR BEHAVIORAL ACTIVATION 

If there is time in this hrst session, you will start discussing a specihc 
problem of signihcant concern to the patient. Developing alternate ways 
of viewing the problem, or concrete steps patients can take to solve the 
problem, tends to increase their hopefulness that treatment will be effec¬ 
tive. Unless patients express a problem of overriding importance, try to 
elicit their agreement to discuss the problem of inactivity—that is, if they 
have withdrawn from activities or are generally at least somewhat inac¬ 
tive. Overcoming depressive passivity and creating opportunities to expe¬ 
rience pleasure and a sense of mastery is essential for most depressed 
patients. Behavioral activation is discussed in the next chapter. 


END-OF-SESSION SUMMARY AND SETTING 
OF HOMEWORK 

The hnal summary ties together the threads of the session and rein¬ 
forces important points. The summary also includes a review of what 

the patient has agreed to do for homework. 

Therapist: Sally, our time is almost up. Can you tell me what you think 
is most important for you to remember this week? You can look at 
your notes [page 67]. 

PATIENT: Well, I guess that I’m not lazy. And I might have a lot of 
depressed thoughts that will make me feel bad, even if they’re not 
true. 

Therapist: Right. And how about the idea that getting more active 
might help improve your mood? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Can we go over the homework now? I want to make sure 
it’s doable, {pointing to the paper) The hrst thing we wrote down is to 
remind yourself that you’re depressed, so you won’t start thinking 
that you’re no good. Now, how will you remember to do that? Do 
you think you could read this sheet of paper when you get up every 
morning? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: How long do you think it will take you? 

Patient: I don’t know. Maybe 5 minutes? 

Therapist: Actually, I think it will take less than a minute. 

PATIENT: Yeah, that’s probably right. 


structure of the First Therapy Session 


75 


Therapist: How will you remember to do it? 

Patient: (Thinks.) I’m not sure. I don’t want to keep it out because my 
roommate could see it. 

Therapist: [making specific suggestions] Could you keep the paper 
somewhere else, like in your backpack? Maybe you could set an 
alarm on your cell phone, so when it beeps, you’ll remember to get 
it out and read it? 

PATIENT: Yeah, that would work. 

Therapist: It would also be good to read it at least once more every 
day. When do you think it would help most? 

PATIENT: (Thinks.) Probably right after dinner. 

Therapist: That sounds good. Do you want to set an alarm for then, 
also? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: I’ll write that plan at the top of the sheet. 

Next, we add to the homework assignment sheet, noting aloud how 
long each task will probably take to accomplish. Many patients overesti¬ 
mate the difficulty and duration of tasks. Specifying time requirements 
help ease the perceived burden. 

Therapist: Sally, we also talked earlier in the session about adding to 
your goal list this week. Do you think you could spend a minute or 
two on it this week? 

Patient: Sure. 

Therapist: And finally, I have a booklet here about depression (Coping 
with Depression] see Appendix B]. Should we make it optional? 
Patient: (Nods.) 

Therapist: I think it will take about 5 or 10 minutes to read. If you do 
read it, you can make mental notes or written notes on what you 
agree with and what you don’t. 

Patient: Okay. 

In this part of the session, I want to maximize the chance that Sally 
will do the homework and feel successful. If you sense that the patient 
may not carry out any part of the assignment, you may offer to change it 
(“Do you think you’ll have trouble jotting down your thoughts?” [If yes] 
“Do you think we should make it optional?”). Depressed patients can 
easily become overwhelmed and then self-critical if they do not com¬ 
plete their homework assignments. (See Chapter 17 for an extended 
discussion of homework.) 


76 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


We also discussed when it would be helpful for Sally to read this 
sheet of paper. It is important to note that Sally, accustomed to doing 
homework for school, is less likely to be overwhelmed and more likely 
to follow through with these activities than another depressed patient 
might be. Some patients may decide to transfer this written list to their 
smartphone or other electronic device. 


FEEDBACK 

The hnal element of every therapy session, at least initially, is feed¬ 
back. By the end of the hrst session, most patients feel positively about 
the therapist and the therapy. Eliciting feedback further strengthens 
rapport, providing the message that you care about what the patient 
thinks. It also gives patients a chance to express, and you to resolve, any 
misunderstandings. Patients may occasionally make an idiosyncratic 
interpretation of something you said or did. Asking them whether there 
was anything that bothered them gives them the opportunity to state 
and then to test their conclusions. In addition to verbal feedback, you 
may decide to have patients complete a written Therapy Report (see 
Figure 5.2). 

Therapist: Now at the end of each session. I’m going to ask how you 
thought the session went. You actually get two chances—telling me 
directly or writing it on a Therapy Report, which you can hll out in 
the waiting room after our session. I’ll read it over, and if there are 
any problems, we can put them on the agenda at our next session. 
Okay? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Now, what did you think of today’s session? Was there any¬ 
thing about this session that bothered you or anything you thought 
I got wrong? 

PATIENT: No, it was good. 

Therapist: Anything you’d like us to do differently next session? 
PATIENT: No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: Okay then. It was a pleasure working with you today. Would 
you please hll out the Therapy Report in the waiting room now and 
the other forms I gave you just before our session next week? And 
you’ll try to do the homework you wrote down on your homework 
sheet. Okay? 

PATIENT: (Nods.) Okay. Thanks. 

Therapist: See you next week. 


1. What did we cover today that's important to you to remember? 


2. How much did you feel you could trust your therapist today? 


3. Was there anything that bothered you about therapy today? If so, what 
was it? 


4. How much homework had you done for therapy today? How likely are 
you to do the new homework? 


5. What do you want to make sure to cover at the next session? 


V_y 


FIGURE 5.2. Therapy Report. From J. S. Beck (2011). Copyight 2011 by Judith S. Beck. 
Reprinted by permission. 


Reprinted by permission in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, Second Edition, by Judith 
S. Beck (Guilford Press, 2011). Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of 
this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers may download a larger 
version of this material from www.guilfoid.com/p/beckd. 


77 




78 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Q: What if... patients have a negative reaction to the session? 

A: You will try to specify the problem and establish its meaning to 

the patient, then intervene or mark the problem for intervention 

at the next session, as in the following example: 

Therapist: Now, was there anything about this session that both¬ 
ered you? 

Patient: I don’t know ... I’m not sure this therapy is for me. 

Therapist: You don’t think it’ll help? 

Patient: No, not really. You see. I’ve got real-life problems. It’s not 
just my thinking. 

Therapist: I’m glad you told me. This gives me the opportunity 
to say that I do believe that you have real-life problems. I 
didn’t mean to imply that you don’t. The problems with your 
boss and your neighbors and your feelings of loneliness ... 
Of course, those are all real problems; problems we’ll work 
together to solve. I don’t think that all we need to do is look at 
your thoughts. I’m sorry if I gave you that impression. 

Patient: That’s okay... It’sjust, like ... well, I feel so overwhelmed. 
I don’t know what to do. 

Therapist: Are you willing to come back next week so we can 
work on the overwhelmed feelings together? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I guess so. 

Therapist: Is the homework contributing to the overwhelmed 
feeling, too? 

Patient: {pause) Maybe. 

Therapist: How would you like to leave it? We could make the 
homework optional, or some of it optional, if you want. 

PATIENT: {sigh of relief) Yeah, that would be better. 

Therapist: What seems hardest to do? 

Patient: Trying to keep track of my thoughts. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s write “optional” next to that one. Or should 
I Just cross it off? 

PATIENT: No, you can write “optional.” 

Therapist: {Does so.) What else feels too hard? 

Patient: Maybe calling my friends. I don’t know if I’m up for 
that. 


structure of the First Therapy Session 


79 


Therapist: Okay, should I write “optional” or cross it off? 
Patient: Maybe cross it off. 

Therapist: Okay. (Does so.) Now, was there anything else that 
bothered you about today’s session? 

Here the therapist recognizes the necessity for strengthening 
the therapeutic alliance. The therapist had either missed signs of 
the patient’s dissatisfaction during the session or the patient was 
adept at concealing it. Had the therapist failed to ask for feedback 
about the session or been less adept at dealing with the negative 
feedback, it is possible that the patient would not have returned 
for another session. The therapist’s flexibility about the homework 
assignment helps the patient reexamine his misgivings about the 
appropriateness of cognitive behavior therapy. By responding 
to feedback and making reasonable adjustments, the therapist 
demonstrates understanding of and empathy toward the patient, 
which facilitates collaboration and trust. 

The therapist will make sure to express at the beginning of 
the next session how important it is that they work as a team to 
tailor the treatment and the homework so the patient hnds them 
helpful. The therapist also uses this difficulty as an opportunity 
to rehne the conceptualization of the patient. In the future, the 
therapist ensures that homework is set more collaboratively with 
the patient and that he does not feel overwhelmed. 

The initial therapy session has several important goals: establish¬ 
ing rapport; refining the conceptualization; socializing patients to the 
process and structure of cognitive behavior therapy; educating patients 
about the cognitive model and about their disorder(s); and providing 
hope and some symptom relief. Developing a solid therapeutic alliance 
and encouraging patients to join with you to accomplish therapeutic 
goals are of primary importance in this session. Chapter 7 describes 
the structure of subsequent therapy sessions and Chapter 8 deals with 
difficulties in structuring sessions. 


Chapter 6 

BEHAVIORAL ACTIVATION 


O ne of the most important initial goals for depressed patients is 
scheduling activities. Most have withdrawn from at least some 
activities that had previously given them a sense of achievement or 
pleasure and lifted their mood. And they frequently have increased 
certain behaviors (staying in bed, watching television, sitting around) 
that maintain or increase their current dysphoria. They often believe 
that they cannot change how they feel emotionally. Helping them to 
become more active and to give themselves credit for their efforts are 
essential parts of treatment, not only to improve their mood, but also to 
strengthen their sense of self-efficacy by demonstrating to themselves 
that they can take more control of their mood than they had previously 
believed. 


CONCEPTUALIZATION OF INACTIVITY 


When considering engaging in activities, patients’ depressed automatic 
thoughts frequently get in their way. 


Situation: Thinking about initiating an activity 
1 

[Common] Automatic thoughts: "I'm too tired. I won't enjoy it. My 
friends won’t want to spend time with me. i won’t be abie to do it. 
Nothing can heip me feei better.” 


80 





Behavioral Activation 


81 


i 

[Common] Emotional reactions: Sadness, anxiety, hopelessness 

i 

[Common] Behavior: Remain inactive. 


Patients’ relative inactivity then contributes to their low mood, as 
they have a paucity of opportunities to gain a sense of mastery or plea¬ 
sure, which leads to more negative thinking, which leads to increased 
dysphoria and inactivity, in a vicious cycle. 


CONCEPTUALIZATION OF LACK OF MASTERY 
OR PLEASURE 

Even when patients do engage in various activities, they often derive 
low levels of satisfaction and pleasure because of their self-critical auto¬ 
matic thoughts. 


Situation: Engaging in an activity 
1 

[Common] Automatic thoughts: "I’m doing a terrible job. I should 
have done this long ago. There’s still so much left to do. / can’t do 
this as well as I used to. This used to be more fun. / don’t deserve 
to be doing this.” 

1 

[Common] Emotional reactions: Sadness, guilt, anger at self 

1 

[Common] Behaviors: Stop the activity. Push self beyond a reasonable 
point. Fail to repeat this activity in the future. 


Self-critical thoughts may arise as patients engage in activities or 
afterward, as they reflect on the results. When scheduling activities, 
it is important to anticipate automatic thoughts that could interfere 
with patients’ initiation of activities, as well as thoughts that could 
diminish patients’ sense of pleasure or achievement during or after an 
activity. 

When you are treating relatively “easy” patients like Sally, you will 
facilitate the identihcation of activities that could potentially help them 
feel better, address interfering thoughts, and assist them in putting 
pleasurable or productive activities in their schedule. You may need to 
help more severely depressed patients develop an hourly schedule of 






82 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


activities for the week to counteract their extensive passivity and inactiv¬ 
ity. It may also be useful for some patients to rate their sense of pleasure 
and achievement following their activities, to examine whether becom¬ 
ing more active and responding to their dysfunctional thinking does 
improve their mood. 

Perhaps the easiest and quickest way to get patients behaviorally 
activated is to review their typical daily schedule (pages 50-52). The 
following questions can guide your discussion. 


Which activities are patients doing too little of, thus depriving 
themselves of obtaining a sense of achievement (mastery), a sense 
of pleasure, or both? These might be activities related to work or 
school, family, friends, their neighborhood, volunteering, sports, 
hobbies, physical exercise, their household, nature, spirituality, or 
sensual. Intellectual, or cultural pursuits. 

Do patients have a good balance of mastery and pleasure 
experiences? For example, are patients driving themselves too hard, 
and so have a dearth of pleasure? Are they avoiding activities they 
predict will be challenging, and so have little opportunity to obtain 
a sense of mastery? 

Which activities are lowest in mastery and/or pleasure? Are these 
activities inherently dysphoric, such as ruminating in bed, and 
so should their frequency be reduced? Or are patients feeling 
dysphoric during potentially rewarding activities because of their 
depressed thinking? 


In the following transcripts, I review Sally’s schedule with her, 
reinforce her conclusions about how she might better plan her time, 
encourage her to commit to specihc changes, elicit the thoughts that 
might impede instituting the changes, label her thoughts as predictions 
that can be tested, give her the choice of a follow-up homework assign¬ 
ment, and teach her to give herself credit. 

Therapist: Thinking about your schedule, what do you notice? How 
are your activities different from say, a year ago, when you weren’t 
depressed? 

PATIENT: Well, Tm spending a lot of time in bed. 

Therapist: Does staying in bed make you feel much better? Do you get 
out of bed feeling refreshed and energetic? 

PATIENT: (Thinks.) No ... I guess not. I usually feel groggy and down 
when I get up. 



Behavioral Activation 


83 


Therapist: Well, that’s valuable information, [providing psychoedu¬ 
cation] It seems most people who are depressed think they’ll feel 
better if they stay in bed. But they usually hnd that doing almost 
anything else is better ... What else is different? 

PATIENT: Last semester, I used to go out more with friends or just hang 
around with them. Now I just go from my dorm room, to class, to 
the library, to the cafeteria, and back to my room. 

Therapist: Does that give you an idea of what you might like to change 
this coming week? 

PATIENT: Yes, well. I’d like to spend more time with other people, but I 
just don’t seem to have any energy. 

Therapist: So you end up staying in bed? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Well, that’s an interesting idea you have: “I don’t have the 
energy to spend time with people.” Let’s write that down, [inquir¬ 
ing about setting up a behavioral experiment] Now, how could we 
test this idea to see if it’s true? 

PATIENT: I guess I could plan to spend some time with my friends and 
see if I could do it. 

Therapist: [trying to motivate Sally to do so] Would there be an 
advantage to doing that? 

PATIENT: I guess I might feel better. 

I infer from Sally’s tone of voice that she might be reluctant to 

do the experiment. I conceptualize that automatic thoughts might be 

interfering. 


Situation: Discussing spending time with friends 
1 

Automatic thought: ?? 

1 

Emotional reaction: Unspecified negative emotion 


To discover Sally’s automatic thought, I ask her directly: 

Therapist: What’s going through your mind right now? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: [providing Sally with the opposite of what I actually believed 
she was thinking] Were you thinking what a good time you’d have 
with your friends? 



84 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: No, I guess I’m worried that my friends won’t want to hang 
out with me. 

Therapist: Okay, [reinforcing the cognitive model] Can you see how 
that thought might stop you from approaching them? 

I mentally hypothesize the following scenario: 


Situation: Thinking of hanging out with friends 
\ 

Automatic thought: “They won’t want to hang out with me.” 

\ 

Emotional reaction: Sadness? 
i 

Likely behavioral reaction (if she doesn’t respond to the 
automatic thought): Stay in her room. 


Next, I determine whether Sally can devise her own response. 

When she cannot, I help her evaluate the validity of her thought and 

devise a behavioral experiment. 

Therapist: How can you answer that thought? 

PATIENT: ... I don’t know. 

Therapist: Do you have any evidence that they won’t want to hang out 
with you? 

PATIENT: No, not really, not unless they’re busy... Except I’m not much 
fun these days. 

Therapist: Have they said something? 

Patient: No ... 

Therapist: Do you have any evidence on the other side—that maybe 
they would want to spend time with you? 

PATIENT: (Thinks.) Well, Emily asked me to go to lunch with her today, 
but I couldn’t. 

Therapist: Okay, that sounds pretty good. So how could you hnd out 
for sure whether Emily or others would want to hang out? 

PATIENT: I guess I could ask them if they want to have dinner or some¬ 
thing. 

Next I ask a series of questions to set up the behavioral experiment 

in a way that maximizes the chance of a positive outcome. 



Behavioral Activation 


85 


Therapist: Who would be easiest for you to ask? Emily? 

Patient: No, Allison and Joe, I guess. 

Therapist: Good. Then you can test two of your predictions. One, that 
your friends won’t want to hang out, and two, that you’re too tired 
to spend time with them. Does that sound right? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: [trying to increase the likelihood that Sally will follow 
through] How likely are you to approach Allison and Joe or some¬ 
one else? 

PATIENT: (in an affirmative tone of voice) I’ll do it. 

Therapist: [recognizing that Sally is more likely to do it if she does it 
immediately] Do you think you could do it today? 

PATIENT: I guess I could. I could text them after the session. 

Therapist: [giving positive reinforcement] That’s great. Then if it 
turns out okay, could you keep trying to get together for friends for 
the rest of the week? What do you think? 

Patient: Yeah, okay. 

Therapist: [hypothesizing that Sally might turn her friends off if she 
is too down] Do you want to talk about what to say to your friends 
about your depression? Or how to balance talking about it with 
some more upbeat things? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t need to. They already know I’ve been down. 
They’re pretty supportive. 

Therapist: Good ... [predicting that Sally could feel worse if she’s 
turned down] Now, if it turns out that friends say no, do you think 
it will be important to remember that it might be because they’re 
busy, not because they don’t want to spend time with you? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Should I write that down? 

Patient: {Nods.) 

Therapist: (writing) “If they say no, it’s likely that they’d like to hang 
out with me but they’re too busy.” (pause) Good. Now, can we go 
back to your schedule? Anything you think you need to change? 

PATIENT: I guess I’m watching too much TV. 

Therapist: Anything you’d like to try to replace it with this week? 

PATIENT: I really don’t know. 

Therapist: I notice you don’t seem to be spending much time doing 
physical activities—is that right? 


86 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: Yeah. I used to run most mornings or swim. 

Therapist: What’s gotten in the way of your doing these things lately? 

PATIENT: Same thing as before, I guess. I’ve felt really tired. And I 
didn’t think I’d enjoy it. 


Situation: Thinking about getting exercise 
1 

Automatic thoughts: "I’m too tired. I won’t enjoy it’’ 
1 

Emotional reaction: Dysphoria 
1 

Behavioral reaction: Stays in bed. 


Therapist: Would you like to plan more exercise, say, going for a short 
run or swim a few times this week? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: How likely is it that you’ll make plans to see friends and 
swim or run—maybe at least three times? 

Patient: Oh, I will. 

Therapist: Should we write these things on an activity chart [see Fig¬ 
ure 6.1] so you’ll be more likely to commit to them? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t need to. I’ll do them. 

Therapist: One more thing. Do you think you could give yourself 
credit every time you do one of these things? You could just say, 
“Good. I did it.” 

PATIENT: {Looking quizzical.) You mean you want me to give myself 
credit for making plans with my friends? 

Therapist: Absolutely, [providing psychoeducation] When people are 
depressed, it’s often difficult for them to do things that they used 
to do easily. Doing things like calling a friend or going for just a 
short run are really important in starting to get yourself over the 
depression. And they do take more energy than lying in bed. So of 
course you deserve credit. 

PATIENT: But those things used to be easy. 

Therapist: When you’re over the depression, you don’t have to give 
yourself credit. But if they’re even a little bit difficult to do now, 
you do deserve credit. And reminding yourself of that will help you 
recognize that you’re doing something productive to get better. 



SUN. 










IVS 










FRI. 










THU. 










WED. 










TUE. 










MON. 











6-7 

oo 

1 

8-9 

9-10 

10-11 

C\J 

T 

12-1 

CvJ 

1 

CO 

1 

C\J 


6u!ujo|/\| uoouj0;j.v 


V 

a, 

<U 

a 

u 

PQ 

c/5 

w 

3 


O 

G^J 

X 

‘u 

a 

o 

u 


o 

G^J 

u 

V 

CQ 


p 


u 


UJ 

Q^ 

D 

O 


87 


Reprinted by permission in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, Second Edition, by Judith S. Beck (Guilford Press, 2011). Permission to photocopy 
this material is granted to purchasers of this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers may download a larger version of this 
material from www.guilford.eom/p/beck4. 




















SUN. 











CO 











FRI. 











THU. 











d 

LU 

§ 











TUB. 











MON. 












1 

CO 

LO 

1 

5-6 

6-7 

7-8 

8-9 

9-10 

10-11 

11-12 

12-1 


uoouja^^V 6u!U9Ag 


88 


FIGURE 6.1. (cont.) 




















Behavioral Activation 


89 


Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: In fact, I’d like you to give yourself credit whenever you 
do something active—that is, whenever you’re not napping or 
watching TV or surhng the Weh. [See pages 274-276 for a further 
description of giving oneself credit.] 

In this segment, I lead Sally to draw conclusions from a review of her 
typical day. Some patients need more guidance than others to do this 
(e.g., “Do you notice how much time you spend in hed? What is your 
mood like when you get up—do you feel much better? What changes 
do you think you might like to try this week?”). I guide Sally to commit 
to implementing specihc changes and identify automatic thoughts that 
might interfere, proposing behavioral experiments to test the validity 
of her negative predictions. I also ask her to give herself credit when¬ 
ever she is active. 

Q: What if ... patients believe they are incapable of becoming more 
active, or that becoming more active will not improve their 
mood? 

A: You will provide education, set up behavioral experiments to help 
patients test their thoughts, and use an activity chart, as below. 

Therapist: [summarizing a review of the patient’s typical day] 
Okay, so it seems as if your activities changed a lot when you 
got depressed. 

Patient: Yes, I just don’t have much energy. I Just lie around the 
house most of the time. 

Therapist: And what’s your mood been like? 

PATIENT: Pretty bad. I’m depressed all the time. 

Therapist: And what do you think will happen if you keep lying 
around the house? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. Nothing, I guess. 

Therapist: So you’ll keep being depressed? 

Patient: I guess so. 

Therapist: What would you think about tryiug to make a bet¬ 
ter schedule for yourself, planning some things to do that 
could give you a sense of pleasure or achievement, like calling 
friends or going for walks? 

PATIENT: I don’t think it would help. And I’m so tired all the time. 
I think I should wait until I’m feeling better. 


90 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: You know, that’s exactly what most people with depres¬ 
sion say. But research shows us that it’s actually the opposite. 
The way people get over their depression is to get more active 
hrst—then they start to feel better. 

Patient: Oh. 

Therapist: Would you be willing to do an experiment this week— 
to see whether you’re too tired, and to see what happens to 
your mood if you do try to do more things? 

PATIENT: I guess so. 

Therapist: Let’s see. [providing a contrast among energy required 
for various activities] What are some things you know for sure 
would be too hard? Running? Doing errands for an entire 
day? Cleaning up your whole apartment? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I couldn’t do those things. 

Therapist: So what’s something on the other side, something that 
takes just a little energy? 

Patient: (Sighs.) I could go to the library. Return my overdue 
book and maybe get some DVDs. 

Therapist: [providing positive reinforcement] Good idea! What 
else could you do? 

Patient: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Do you think you could do a few tasks a day—if they 
were only for 10 minutes each? 

PATIENT: I guess I could. 

Therapist: Good. 

The therapist helps the patient specify these tasks and con¬ 
tinues to elicit additional activities, then requests that the patient 

use an activity chart. 

Therapist: These are all good activities, (pulling out the Activity 
Chart in Figure 6.2) I’d like to hgure out with you when you 
might do these things. Is it okay if we write them down on 
this chart? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: (looking at the description of the patient’s typical day) So, 
it looks as if you usually get up around 11:00 or 11:30. What 
would you think about getting up by 10:00 and 10:30 in the 
morning? 


SUN. 










IVS 










FRI. 










THU. 










d 

LU 

§ 










TUB. 










MON. 

Sleep 

Sleep 

Sleep 

Sleep 

Get up/shower/ 
dress 

Breakfast 

Kitchen 

cleanup—10 min 

TV 

Newspaper 

Errand or window¬ 
shopping 

Rest 


6-7 

7-8 

CD 

1 

CO 

9-10 

10-11 

CvJ 

T 

12-1 

CvJ 

1 

2-3 


6u!Ujo|/\| uoouj0}^v 


91 


IGURE 6.2. Initial (partial) Activity Chart for a more severely depressed patient. FromJ. S. Beck (2011). Copyright 2011 by Judith S. Beck, 
.dapted by permission. 



















SUN. 











CO 











FRI. 











THU. 











d 

LU 

§ 











TUB. 











MON. 

TV 

Lunch 

Kitchen 

cleanup—10 min 

Call sister 

Laundry—10 min 

TV 

Walk 

Rest 

Laundry—10 min 

Dinner 

Kitchen 

cleanup—10 min 

Call Jonathan 
E-mail 

YouTube 

Surf Web 


Get in bed 

Sleep 

Sleep 


1 

CO 

LO 

1 

5-6 

6-7 

7-8 

8-9 

9-10 

10-11 

11-12 

12-1 


uooujajj.v 6 u!U0A3 


92 


FIGURE 6.2. (cont.) 




















Behavioral Activation 


93 


PATIENT: I could do that. 

Therapist: What would be good to do next? 

Patient: Take a shower, I guess. Get dressed. Have breakfast. 
Therapist: So that’s a change from what you usually do? 

Patient: Yeah, sometimes I don’t get dressed all day. 

Therapist: How about if you write down, in the 10 o’clock space, 
“Get up, shower, get dressed.” And then write “Have break¬ 
fast” in the 11 o’clock space.” [See Figure 6.2.] 

Patient: Okay. {Does so.) 

Therapist: Now, what do want to do after breakfast? Wash your 
breakfast dishes? 

Patient: 1 should. I’ve been letting dishes pile up in the sink. The 
kitchen is kind of a mess. 

Therapist: So, how about doing dishes or cleaning up the kitchen 
for 10 minutes? You don’t have to hnish everything at once. 

PATIENT: (sigh of relief) Okay. 

Therapist: And then after the dishes? Do you want to take a 
break, watch TV or read the newspaper or surf the Web like 
you usually do? 

PATIENT: Yeah, that would be good. 

Therapist: Okay, so in the 11 o’clock space, let’s put “clean kitchen 
for 10 minutes,” and in the 12 o’clock space put “TV or news¬ 
paper or surf the Web.” 

The therapist and patient continue in this vein until they have 
made a schedule for the next day. Because the patient has been so 
inactive, the therapist takes care not to overwhelm him by creat¬ 
ing too busy a schedule. She builds in short periods of activity with 
longer periods of leisure activity or rest. She also asks the patient 
to give himself credit every time he follows the schedule. Next 
she asks the patient if he is willing to try to follow the same basic 
schedule every day. They make lists of potential tasks the patient 
could do at home, people he could call, and places he could go. 

At the following session, the therapist reviews this homework 
assignment of following the schedule. She asks the patient about 
his previous predictions: that he would be too tired to do activi¬ 
ties and that they would not help. Discovering that his automatic 
thoughts were inaccurate can motivate the patient to get up ear¬ 
lier and engage in a greater number of productive or pleasurable 
activities. 


94 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Q: What if... patients can’t come up with any pleasurable activities? 

A: There are many lists from which patients can choose activities. 
See, for example, Frisch (2005) or a list described in MacPhillamy 
and Lewinsohn (1982), which can be accessed at: www.healthnet- 
solutions.com/dsp/PleasantEventsSchedule.pdf. It is useful to give a 
forced choice when reviewing a list with a patient: “Which hve 
or 10 activities from the list do you think could be most enjoy¬ 
able?” If patients are reluctant, it is useful to help them recognize 
that staying in bed maintains or increases their dysphoria. Then 
ask them whether they think engaging in a given activity from 
the list is likely to make their mood worse than staying in bed. If 
they reply no, ask them whether they are willing to schedule the 
activity. If they say yes, ask them whether they are willing to do a 
behavioral experiment to see if they are right. 

Q: What if... patients are already fully scheduled or overscheduled? 

A: If patients already have a good balance of activities, they may not 
need to change their schedule. If the balance is not good, they 
may need to build in some rest time and/or increase the number 
of pleasurable and/or mastery activities. If they are owmcheduled, 
they may need to decrease their activity level. (They also need to 
give themselves credit for making any of these changes.) In any 
case, if they do not gain a sense of pleasure and mastery from 
their activities, they may need your help in responding to the dys¬ 
functional cognitions they are experiencing. They may also need 
to respond to automatic thoughts that interfere with changing 
their activities. 

Q: What if ... patients report that changing their activities has no 
impact on their mood? 

A: Except in the most severe cases of depression, it is unlikely that 
patients experience no fluctuations in how they feel. But the fluc¬ 
tuations may be small, and patients may not remember them. 
For these patients, it is helpful to teach them to rate their sense 
of achievement and mastery on 10-point scales and to rate their 
mood immediately following their activities, as below. 

Therapist: [summarizing a review of the patient’s homework] So 
you did a lot of things this week that we predicted could lift 
your mood, but you found that nothing helped? Your mood 
was the same, no matter what you did? 

Patient: Yeah. 


Behavioral Activation 


95 


Therapist: I have two theories. One, you had interfering auto¬ 
matic thoughts. And/or two, maybe you did experience slight 
mood changes, but you either didn’t notice them or don’t 
remember them. 

Patient: I don’t know. 

The therapist then elicits the cognitions the patient had when 
engaging in various activities and helps him respond to them, in 
anticipation of their re-occurrence in the coming week. The ther¬ 
apist also ascertains that the patient had neglected to give himself 
credit. Next they decide to have the patient rate the sense of mas¬ 
tery and pleasure he gets. 

Therapist: Suppose we make up a pleasure scale hrst so you’ll 
have a guideline to rate your activities [see Figure 6.3]. Now 
on a scale from 0 to 10, what activity would you call a 10? An 
activity that has given you great pleasure or that you could 
imagine giving you great pleasure? 

Patient: Oh, I guess that would be when I went to the champion¬ 
ship game [of his home football team]. 

Therapist: Okay, next to “10” write “At football game” on the 
chart. 

Patient: {Does so.) 

Therapist: Now, what would you call a 0? An activity that gives 
you absolutely no pleasure? 

Patient: That would be arguing with my partner. 

Therapist: All right, write that next to 0. 

Patient: {Does so.) 

Therapist: And what would be something midway in between? 


r 

Pleasure 

Mastery 

\ 

10 

Arguing with partner 

Buiiding the deck 


5 

Dinner with brother 

Raking ieaves iast year 


0 

V 

At footbaii game 

Bouncing a check 

/ 


FIGURE 6.3. Pleasure and Mastery Rating Scale. 



96 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Patient: I guess ... having dinner with my brother. 

Therapist: Good, write that. 

If the patient can easily match activities with numbers, these 
three anchor points are usually sufficient, although the patient 
can add more points if desired. If the patient has difficulty with 
numbers, you can change the anchor points to “low,” “medium,” 
and “high.” After completing the pleasure scale, the patient hlls 
out the accomplishment scale in the same way. Next the therapist 
asks the patient to use his scales to rate today’s activities. 

Therapist: That’s good. Now let’s have you hll in a little of today’s 
schedule. Here—it’s the 11 o’clock block—write “therapy” 

and under that, “A =_” and “P =_.” 

Now how much of a sense of accomplishment or mastery have 
you felt during therapy today? 

Patient: About a 3. 

Therapist: And pleasure? 

Patient: About a 2. {Fills in the blocks.) 

Therapist: And what did you do in the hour right before therapy 
today? 

PATIENT: I went to the bookstore. 

Therapist: Okay. Write “bookstore” in the 10 o’clock block. Now, 
look at the scale. How much of a sense of accomplishment did 
you get during that hour? 

Patient: Maybe 2 or 3. {Writes it down.) I found the book I 
wanted. 

Therapist: And pleasure? 

Patient: None, really. 

Therapist: So being at the bookstore was like arguing with your 
partner? 

PATIENT: No, I guess it was about a 2. 

Therapist: But isn’t that interesting? Your hrst reaction was that 
you got no pleasure at all. The depression probably interferes 
with recognizing, or maybe remembering, pleasurable activi¬ 
ties. That’s why I think it’s worth your keeping this activity 
chart this week, to hnd out whether some activities are better 
than others, {pause) Do you think you’re straight on what to 
do? 




Behavioral Activation 


97 


Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Could you tell me why it might be worth the effort to 
do all this? 

Patient: Well, it sounds like you’re saying that maybe my mood 
does change some, based on what I’m doing. 

Therapist: What do you think? 

Patient: I guess that could be right. 

Therapist: If that’s true, we can try to schedule more activities 
that do make you feel better next week. Now, the ideal thing 
would be to have you hll this out as close to the time you hn- 
ish an activity as you can—so you won’t forget what you did, 
and so your ratings will be more accurate. If that’s impossible, 
could you try to hll this out at lunch, dinner, and bedtime? 

PATIENT: Yeah, it shouldn’t be a problem. 

Therapist: And if you can hll it out every day, that would give us 
the most information. But even if you just do a couple of days, 
that would give us some. Now one last thing. How about if you 
look over the activity chart the day before our next session? 
See if there are any patterns, or anything you can learn from 
it. You can write down your conclusions on the back if you 
want. Okay? 

Patient: Okay. 


USING THE ACTIVITY CHART TO ASSESS 
THE ACCURACY OF PREDICTIONS 

When patients are skeptical that scheduling activities can help, you can 
ask them to predict levels of mastery and pleasure or mood on one activ¬ 
ity chart and then record actual ratings on another. These comparisons 
can be a useful source of data. 

Therapist: Let’s take a look now at your predictions on the hrst activ¬ 
ity chart and what actually happened on the second one. 

Patient: (Nods.) 

Therapist: Let’s see ... it looks as if you predicted very low scores, 
mostly O’s to 3’s, for these three times you scheduled to meet your 
friends. What did happen? 

PATIENT: Actually, I had a better time than I’d thought—my pleasure 
scores were 3’s to 5’s. 


98 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: What does that tell you? 

Patient: I guess I’m not a good predictor. I thought I wouldn’t enjoy 
myself, hut I did, at least some. 

Therapist: Would you like to schedule more social activities for this 
coming week? 

Patient: Yes, I should. 

Therapist: Good. Do you see what could have happened—and, in 
fact, what was happening before you came to therapy? You kept 
predicting that you’d have a lousy time with your friends so you 
didn’t make any plans; in fact, you turned down their invitations. It 
sounds as if this therapy homework helped you test your ideas; you 
found it was wrong that you’d have a lousy time, and now it sounds 
as if you’re more willing to schedule more. Is that right? 

PATIENT: Yes. But that reminds me, I wanted to talk about one predic¬ 
tion that actually turned out worse. 

Therapist: Okay, when was that? 

Patient: I predicted that I’d get 4’s in accomplishment and pleasure 
when I went running over the weekend. But both were I’s. 

Therapist: Do you have any idea why? 

Patient: Not really. 

Therapist: How were you feeling when you were running? 

PATIENT: Mostly frustrated. 

Therapist: And what was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. I wasn’t feeling very good. I got winded real eas¬ 
ily. I couldn’t believe how hard it was. 

Therapist: Did you have thoughts like that—”I don’t feel very good,” 
“I’m winded,” “This is hard”? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I think so. 

Therapist: Anything else go through your mind? 

PATIENT: I remembered how it used to be. I could go 2 or 3 miles with¬ 
out getting too winded. 

Therapist: Did you have a memory, an image of how it used to be? 

PATIENT: Yeah. It was easy. I’m in really bad shape now. It’s going to 
be so hard to get back in shape. I’m not sure I’ll everhe able to get 
back in shape. 

Therapist: Okay, let me see if I understand, [summarizing] Here in 
my office you thought you’d get a moderate sense of accomplish¬ 
ment and pleasure when you went running. But instead, you got 
very little. It sounds as if you had a memory of how it used to be and 


Behavioral Activation 


99 


you also had thoughts that interfered, such as, “This is hard,” “I’m 
real winded,” “I used to do this easily,” “I’m in such bad shape now,” 
“Maybe I’ll never be able to get back in shape.” And these thoughts 
made you feel frustrated. Does that sound right? 

Patient: Yeah. 

In this last part, the therapist uses the activity chart as a vehicle for 
identifying a number of automatic thoughts that were undermining the 
patient’s enjoyment of an activity. In the next part, the therapist will: 

1. Help him evaluate a key cognition, “Maybe I’ll never be able to 
get back in shape.” 

2. Teach him to compare himself to how he was at his worst point 
instead of his best point, so he can feel good about running 
instead of being so self-critical. 

Behavioral activation is essential for most depressed patients. Many 
patients need only to be provided with a rationale, guidance in select¬ 
ing and scheduling activities, and responses to predicted automatic 
thoughts that might interfere with implementing the activities or with 
gaining a sense of pleasure or mastery from them. Therapists often 
need to be gently persistent in helping patients become more active. 
Patients who are quite inactive initially beneht from learning how to 
create and adhere to a daily schedule with increasing degrees of activ¬ 
ity. Patients who are skeptical about scheduling activities may beneht 
from doing behavioral experiments to test their ideas, and/or checking 
the accuracy of their automatic thoughts by comparing their predic¬ 
tions to what actually occurs. 


Chapter 7 

^90 


SESSION 2 AND BEYOND; 
STRUCTURE AND FORMAT 


S ession 2 uses a format that is repeated in every subsequent ses¬ 
sion. This chapter presents the format and describes the general 
course of therapy from Session 2 to near termination. The hnal phase 
of treatment is described in Chapter 18, and typical problems that arise 
in socializing the patient during early sessions are presented in Chap¬ 
ter 8. 

The typical agenda for the second session and beyond is as fol¬ 
lows: 


Initial Part of Session 

1. Do a mood check. 

2. Set the agenda. 

3. Obtain an update. 

4. Review homework. 

5. Prioritize the agenda. 

Middle Part of Session 

6. Work on a specific problem and teach cognitive behavior 
therapy skills in that context. 


100 





structure and Format 


101 


7. Follow-up discussion with relevant, collaboratively set 
homework assignment(s). 

8. Work on second problem. 

End of Session 

9. Provide or elicit a summary. 

10. Review new homework assignments. 

11. Elicit feedback. 


If you are new to this format, you can make a copy of this chart to keep 
with you. You can show it (or a simplified version) to patients so they 
can get a better idea of what treatment will be like, and so the two of you 
can keep track of where you are in the session. 

Your goals during this second session are to help patients identify 
important problems on which to work and, in the context of problem 
solving, you will teach patients relevant skills, especially identifying and 
responding to automatic thoughts and, for most depressed patients, 
scheduling activities. You will continue to socialize patients into cog¬ 
nitive behavior therapy: following the session format, working collab¬ 
oratively, providing feedback, and starting to view their past and ongo¬ 
ing experience in light of the cognitive model. If the patient is feeling 
somewhat better, you will also start relapse prevention work (see Chap¬ 
ter 18). Above all, you are concerned with building the therapeutic alli¬ 
ance and providing symptom relief. 


THE FIRST PART OF THE SESSION 

The specific goals of the introductory part of the session, described 
below, are to: 


• Reestablish rapport. 

Elicit the names of problems patients want help in solving. 
Collect data that may Indicate other important problem areas 
to discuss. 

Review homework. 

• Prioritize the problems on the agenda. 


The achievement of these goals is facilitated when patients review the 
Preparing for Therapy Worksheet (Figure 7.1) prior to the session 
(either mentally or in writing). 






102 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


r ^ 

1. What did we talk about last session that was important? What do my 
therapy notes say? 

2. What has my mood been like, compared to other weeks? 

3. What happened (positive and negative) this week that my therapist should 
know? 

4. What problems do I want help in solving? What is a short name for each of 
these problems? 

5. What homework did I do? (If I didn't do it, what got in the way?) What did I 
learn? 

V_ 


FIGURE 7.1. Preparing for Therapy Worksheet. 

Mood (and Medication) Check 

The mood check is usually brief. It helps you and patients keep track 
of how they are progressing. If patients complete symptom checklists, 
you will examine them to determine whether patients have additional 
problems that they may not report verbally, such as suicidal ideation, 
difficulties sleeping, feeling worthless or punished, fearing the worst 
will happen, increased irritability, and so on. It may be important to 
address one or more of these problems during the session. 

You will also elicit a subjective description from patients and match 
it with objective test scores. If there is a discrepancy between the test 
scores and the self-report, question the patient (e.g., “So you’ve been 
feeling worse, but your depression inventory is actually lower than last 
week. What do you make of that?”). You will also make a quick compari¬ 
son between the objective scores of the previous session and the present 
objective scores (e.g., “Your anxiety score is lower this week than last. 
Have you been feeling less anxious?”). You should also conhrm that 
patients are not reporting how they feel just that day, but instead are 
providing an overview of their mood for the past week. A typical second 
session begins as follows: 

Therapist: Hi, Sally. How have you been feeling? 

Patient: About the same, I guess. Tm still feeling pretty depressed. 
And a lot more worried. 

Therapist: Can I take a look at your forms? When you hlled them out, 
were you thinking about the week as a whole—or just today? 
PATIENT: The whole week. 

Therapist: Good. Okay, yes, it sure looks like you were much more 
anxious this week. Should we put “anxiety” on the agenda to talk 
about in a few minutes? 



structure and Format 


103 


Patient: {Nods.) 

Therapist: {indicating the Beck Depression Inventory) It looks like your 
depression score is down a little this week, compared to last week. 
Did it feel that way to you? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I think so. 

Therapist: Okay, that’s good. 

Q: What if... patients elaborate at length about their mood? 

A: You will socialize them to give a concise description. For exam¬ 
ple: 

“Sally, can I interrupt you for a moment? Can you tell me in just a 
couple of sentences how your depression and anxiety have been 
this week compared to last week? Have you been feeling more 
depressed, about the same, or less depressed?” 

Having gained an overall sense of Sally’s mood in the past week, I 
elicit her attribution for the change. I want her to recognize the positive 
actions she took and the adaptive changes in her thinking. 

Therapist: Why do you think you’re a little less depressed? 

PATIENT: I guess I’ve been feeling a little more hopeful, like maybe 
therapy might help. 

Therapist: [subtly reinforcing the cognitive model] So you had 
thoughts like, “Therapy might help,” and those thoughts made you 
feel more hopeful, less depressed? 

PATIENT: Yes ... and Lisa—she’s in my chemistry class—asked me to 
study with her. We spent a couple of hours yesterday going over 
some formulas. That made me feel better, too. 

Therapist: What went through your mind when you were studying 
with her yesterday? 

PATIENT: That I was glad she asked me to study with her ... I under¬ 
stand it more now. 

Therapist: So we have two good examples of why you felt better this 
week. One, you had hopeful thoughts about therapy. And two, you 
did something different—studying with Lisa—and got at least a 
small sense of achievement. 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Can you see how your thinking and what you did affected 
how you felt—in a positive way? 


104 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


To build a sense of self-efficacy and to encourage further cognitive and 
behavioral change, I positively reinforce Sally for the adaptive changes 
she made: 

Therapist: It’s great that you were having these hopeful thoughts 
about therapy and that you made the effort to study with Lisa. 

If patients have been feeling better but are unsure why, ask, “Have 
you noticed any changes in your thinking or in what you’ve been 
doing?” 

I Q: What if ... patients attribute positive changes in their mood to 
external factors? 

A: Patients often say, “I felt better because the medication started 
working/my boss was out sick/my partner was nicer to me.” You 
might then suggest, “I’m sure that helped, but did you also find 
yourself t/jmfemg’differently or doing anything different?” 

Likewise, you will seek patients’ attributions if their mood has wors¬ 
ened: “Why do you think you’re feeling worse this week? Could it have 
anything to do with your thinking, or with the things you did or didn’t 
do?” In this way, you subtly reinforce the cognitive model and imply 
that patients can take some control over how they feel. 

Q: What if... patients state that nothing ca.n improve their mood? 

A: For some patients who persist in this belief, it might be helpful to 
put “Things that can help me feel better and things that can help 
me feel worse” on the agenda to discuss later in session. A chart 
such as the one in Figure 7.2 can help reinforce the notion that 
patients can take at least minimal control of their mood. Through 
guided discovery, you can help them see that avoidance, isolation, 


Things that make me feel better 

Riding my bike 
Getting through my e-maiis 
Going on Facebook 
Meeting up with friends 
Working on the car 


Things that make me feel worse 

Staying in bed 
Taking iong naps 
Watching too much TV 
Sitting around 

_ J 


FIGURE 7.2. A better/worse list. 




structure and Format 


105 


and inactivity generally increase their dysphoria (or at least does 
not improve it), while engagement in certain activities (usually 
that involve interpersonal interaction or that have the potential 
for pleasure or mastery) can lead to an improvement in their 
mood, even if initially it is small. 


The brief mood check creates several opportunities: 

• You demonstrate your concern for how patients have been 
feeling in the past week. 

• You and they can monitor how they have been progressing over 
the course of treatment. 

• You can identify (and then reinforce or modify) their explanation 
for progress or lack thereof. 

• You can also reinforce the cognitive model; namely, how patients 
have been viewing situations and how they have been behaving 
have influenced their mood. 


When reviewing objective measures, make sure to review individual 
items to look for important positive or negative changes (e.g., changes 
in suicidal ideation or hopelessness). According to patients’ diagnoses 
and symptomatology, you might also ask for additional information 
not specifically covered in the tests (e.g., number and severity of panic 
attacks, binges, substance use, angry outbursts, self-harm, destructive 
behavior). 

If patients are taking medication for their psychological difficul¬ 
ties, you will briefly check on adherence, problems, side effects, or 
questions. It is important to phrase the adherence question in terms 
of frequency—not “Did you take your medicine this week,” but ratber, 
“How many times this week were you able to take your medicine the way 
[the provider] prescribed?” (See, e.g., J. S. Beck, 2001, for suggestions 
on how to increase medication adherence.) 

If you are not the prescribing healthcare provider, you will obtain 
patients’ permission and then periodically contact the provider to 
exchange information. You will not recommend changes in medica¬ 
tion, but you might help patients respond to cognitions that interfere 
with their taking medication (or, if applicable, reducing medication). If 
they have concerns about issues sucb as side effects, dosage, addiction 
to medications, or alternative medications or supplements, you will help 
patients write down specific questions to ask their provider. If patients are 
not taking medication but you believe a pharmacological intervention is 
indicated, you might suggest a medical or psychiatric consultation. 



106 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Setting an Initial Agenda 

The purpose of this brief segment is to set an initial agenda. You social¬ 
ize patients into bringing up the names of problems they want help in 
solving. Rather than asking, “What do you want to talk about today?” or 
“What do you want to put on the agenda?’’(which can lead to less pro¬ 
ductive discussions), you phrase the question in a problem-solving way 
(until patients are socialized to setting the agenda in this way): 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, what problem or problems do you want my help 
in solving today? Can you just tell me the names of the problems? 

PATIENT: Well, I’ve got this economics exam coming up and I just don’t 
understand the material. I’ve been so worried. I just can’t concen¬ 
trate. I don’t know what to do. I keep reading ... 

Therapist: {gently interrupting [socializing the patient into briefly 
specifying a problem to be discussed later in the session] Should 
we put the exam on the agenda? 

PATIENT: Yes, dehnitely. 

Rather than having Sally provide a full description of the problem 
at this point, I gently interrupt her, name the problem, and ask to put it 
on the agenda to discuss in a few minutes. Had I allowed her to launch 
into a lengthier description of the problem, / ivould have deprived her of 
the opportunity to reflect on and prioritize what she most wanted to talk about 
during the session, which may or may not have been the hrst problem she 
brought up. Next I probe for additional important agenda topics: 

Therapist: Are there any other problems you want help with? 

PATIENT: Well, things aren’t going too well with my roommate. We keep 
such different hours. She ... 

Therapist: {gently interrupting Should we call that, “problem with your 
roommate”? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: [probing for other problems that might be even more 
important to address during the session than these hrst two] When 
did you feel the worst this week? 

Patient: {Thinks.) I guess when I was trying to study for the exam. And 
in class. 

Therapist: Any other times that were particularly bad? 

PATIENT: No, those were the worst. 


structure and Format 


107 


Therapist: Should we put “studying and class” on the agenda? 
Patient: Yes, that would be good. 

I then ascertain whether the patient anticipates the occurrence of other 
important difficulties before I see her again: 

Therapist: And are there any other problems you think are likely to 
come up this week? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t think so. 

I Q: What if... patients have difficulty coming up with agenda items? 

A: Often patients need a little encouragement initially to suggest 
agenda items. They may not be clearly cognizant of what has been 
bothering them, and/or they may be unsure of what is appropri¬ 
ate to bring up. Chapter 8 describes what to do with patients who 
display this difficulty. 


Update of Week 

The next part of the session helps you make a bridge between the pre¬ 
vious session and the current one. It includes a brief update of the 
patient’s week, during which you will remain alert for potential prob¬ 
lems that could be important for the agenda. First you seek to get the 
general gist of how the patient’s week went. 

Therapist: Did anything else happen this week that’s important for 
me to know? 

PATIENT: (Thinks.) Ummm. (sigh) Yeah, I overslept and missed a class. 
Therapist: [probing to see whether it is important enough to add to 
the agenda] Is that a problem we need to talk about today? 
Patient: No, I don’t think so. I just forgot to set my alarm. 

Therapist: Okay, anything else? 

Patient: No, not that I can think of. 

Next you will elicit positive experiences: 

Therapist: All right. Now, can you tell me what happened this week 
that was positive? Or situations in which maybe you felt a little bit 
better? 

Patient: (Thinks.) Umm, I think running helped. I also felt better 
when I talked to my mom on the phone. 

Therapist: Okay, that’s good. Were there any other good things that 
happened? 


108 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Asking for positive experiences helps patients realize that they did 
not feel the same unrelenting severity of distress for the entire week. 
You should note the positive data, which you may use later in the session 
or in future sessions, especially when planning positive activities for 
patients to engage in or when helping them evaluate relevant automatic 
thoughts and heliefs. Uncovering positive data may also put patients in 
a better frame of mind, making them more receptive to upcoming proh- 
lem solving. You may decide to engage patients conversationally about 
these items (usually briefly), either at the time or later, to brighten their 
mood or to demonstrate your interest in them, thereby strengthening 
the therapeutic alliance. 

Homework Review 

Next you will hnd out what the patient accomplished for homework. 
(Chapter 17 provides a more extensive description of this part of the 
session.) Reviewing the patient’s homework is critical. If you do not, 
patients invariably stop doing it. Sometimes the review of homework is 
relatively brief; at other times, however, it may become the m^or part 
of the session, if it is related to the problems on the agenda. Part of 
the art of therapy is determining how much time to spend reviewing 
homework versus discussing other problems the patient wants help in 
solving. 

Generally you ask patients to read aloud the assignments from their 
Homework List (see, e.g., page 67). You ask them to rate how much they 
currently believe the adaptive statements, the responses to their auto¬ 
matic thoughts and beliefs you discussed in the previous sessions (s). You 
hnd out which behavioral assignments they did and what they learned 
from them. And you discuss which assignments would be helpful for 
them to continue in the coming week. If any homework items require 
a lengthy discussion (or if there are any assignments they failed to do), 
you can collaboratively decide to discuss them later in the session, so 
you can quickly review the rest of the assignments. 

Therapist: Next, can we talk about your homework? Do you have the 
notes from last week? 

PATIENT: Yes {Pulls out list [Figure 5.1, page 67]; therapist pulls out her 
copy, too.) 

Therapist: Good. Okay if we go through it? 

Patient: Sure. 

Therapist: So how did you do with reading this twice a day? 

Patient: Pretty good. I think I only missed one or two days. 


structure and Format 


109 


Therapist: Can you read the first item? 

PATIENT: {Reads aloud.) “Iff start thinking I’m lazy and no good, remind 
myself that I have a real illness, called depression, that makes it 
harder for me to do things. As the treatment starts to work, my 
depression will lift, and things will get easier.” 

Therapist: How much do you helieve that right now? 

PATIENT: I guess I do helieve it. 

Therapist: Good, {going on to second item on list) Did you think of any 
other goals? 

Patient: No. 

Therapist: Okay. If you do, let me know. {Moving on to third item) Were 
you ahle to catch your automatic thoughts when you noticed your 
mood changing? 

PATIENT: I tried, hut I don’t think I always know what I’m thinking. 

Therapist: That’s okay. We’ll he talking about automatic thoughts 
at every session. Were you ahle to identify any automatic thoughts 
when your mood changed? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I think so, hut I didn’t write them down. 

Therapist: What was the situation? 

Patient: I was sitting in class, and all of a sudden I got really nervous. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I was thinking the exam was coming up, and there’s no way 
I’ll he ready for it. 

Therapist: Good. Let me jot that down. Can we get hack to this 
thought in a few minutes when we talk about the exam? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Any other automatic thoughts you were aware of this 
week? 

Patient: Not really. 

Therapist: So you didn’t get much of an opportunity to remind your¬ 
self that just because you think something doesn’t necessarily mean 
it’s true? 

PATIENT: {Shakes her head.) 

Therapist: What do you think of that idea now? 

Patient: I guess it’s true. Like the Coping with Depression booklet says. 

Therapist: Did you get together with Allison or Joe or other people 
this week? 


110 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Sally and I quickly review this assignment. We collaboratively agree 
that she will continue to look for her automatic thoughts and make 
social plans in the coming week. Then we briefly discuss key concepts 
in the Coping with Depression booklet. 

Prioritizing the Agenda 

Now that you have set an initial agenda and possibly added more top¬ 
ics as you collected data about the patient’s week and homework, you 
will summarize the topics. If there are too many agenda items, you and 
the patient will collaboratively prioritize items and agree to move the 
discussion of less important problems to a future session. You may also 
hnd out whether patients want to spend about an equal amount of time 
on each item. 

Therapist: Okay, can we prioritize the agenda now [providing a ratio¬ 
nale] so we can hgure out how to spend our time this session? 
You mentioned your exam, a problem with your roommate, and 
feeling particularly worse when you were studying and in class. 
{pause) Is there any other problem that is even more important 
than those? 

PATIENT: Well, I’ve been feeling bad about not calling my cousin. 

Therapist: Okay, {jotting it down and then adding my own items to the 
agenda) I’d also like to talk about how you can expect your mood 
to improve and some more about automatic thoughts. Does that 
sound okay? 

Patient: Yes, that’s hne. 

Therapist: Anything else for the agenda? 

PATIENT: I don’t think so. 

Therapist: I don’t know if we’ll get to everything, [helping Sally priori¬ 
tize her problems] If we run out of time, are there some things we 
can put off until next week? 

Patient: Ummm ... I guess the problem with my roommate. It’ll prob¬ 
ably just blow over. And my cousin. That can wait. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s put those last on our list, and we’ll see if we get 
to them. 

Alternatively, you can ask: 

Therapist: If we only have time to talk about one or two of these prob¬ 
lems, which would be the most important? 


structure and Format 


111 


It is important to note that you need not always adhere to the 
agenda. Indeed, under some circumstances, you should not follow the 
agenda. When deviating from the agenda, however, you should explic¬ 
itly note the change and elicit the patient’s agreement. 

Therapist: Sally, I can see that you’re still worried about your exam, 
but we’re running out of time. Would you like to spend the rest 
of the session on it and postpone our other agenda items to next 
week? Or we could try to spend just 5 more minutes on it, so we’ll 
still have time to talk about feeling bad when you’re studying or in 
class. 

PATIENT: I guess we should try to get to those things, too. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s both keep an eye on the clock. 

You might suggest a change in how you and a patient spend time 
during a session for a number of reasons. For example, as in the previ¬ 
ous transcript, the patient is quite upset about a particular issue and 
needs more time to discuss it. Or a new topic arises that seems espe¬ 
cially important. Or the patient’s mood changes (for the worse) during 
the session. 

Q: What if... patients start talking about a whole new topic that is not 
on the agenda? 

A: When patients drift into a new topic, you gently interrupt them, 
calling attention to the change and allowing the patient to make 
a conscious choice of which issue to pursue. Patients frequently 
introduce new topics without quite realizing they are doing so. 

Patient: Then another time I was trying to study in the library 
and I got so distracted when I saw this girl from my high 
school, Julia. I Just started to obsess over whether I should 
go talk to her. When we were in 10th grade, Julia was pretty 
friendly, and then something happened, I’m not sure what it 
was. I think she may have ... 

Therapist: Can I Just interrupt you for a moment? We started 
off talking about the trouble you’ve been having studying for 
your exam, and now it sounds as if the focus is Julia. Is it more 
important to you to go back to talking about the exam, or is 
Julia more important to talk about? 

Patient: Oh, the exam. Julia’s not that important. 

Therapist: Okay, so you were saying that it’s generally hard for 
you to get to work at the library? 


112 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


You steer patients away from peripheral issues that were not on the 
original agenda, and which hold little promise for helping them prog¬ 
ress during the session. A notable exception occurs when you deliber¬ 
ately (though usually briefly) engage patients in more casual conversa¬ 
tion to achieve a specific goal. For example, you might ask about their 
family, movies, or social events they have recently attended to brighten 
their mood, facilitate the alliance, or assess their cognitive functioning 
or social skills. 


THE MIDDLE PART OF THE SESSION 

Next you will list the names of the problems on the prioritized agenda 
and ask patients which problem they want to work on first. Doing so 
affords them the opportunity to be active and take responsibility. At 
times, though, you may take the lead in suggesting an agenda item with 
which to start, especially when you judge that a particular problem is 
the most important. (“Is it okay with you if we start with the problem of 
finding a part-time job?”) 

You will collect data about the problem, conceptualize the patients’ 
difficulties according to the cognitive model, and collaboratively decide 
on which part of the cognitive model you will begin working (solving the 
problem situation, evaluating automatic thoughts, reducing patients’ 
immediate distress (if the patients’ affect is so high they cannot focus 
on problem solving, evaluating thoughts, or behavioral change), sug¬ 
gesting behavioral changes (and teaching behavioral skills if needed), 
or decreasing patients’ physiological arousal (if it is interfering with an 
important discussion). In the context of discussing problems on the 
agenda, you will be teaching patients skills and setting new homework. 
You will also make periodic summaries, if needed, to help you and the 
patient recall what you have been doing in this part of the session. 

In discussing the first problem (and subsequent problems), you will 
interweave your therapy goals as appropriate. In this second session, I 
seek not only to help Sally do some problem solving, but also to: 


• Reinforce the cognitive model. 

• Continue teaching Sally to identify her automatic thoughts. 

• Provide some symptom relief through helping Sally 
respond to her anxious thoughts. 

• As always, maintain and build rapport through accurate 
understanding. 



structure and Format 


113 


Agenda Item No. 1 

Therapist: Okay, let’s take a look at the agenda. Where do you think 
we should start? We could talk about your exam, your mood when 
you’re studying or when you’re in the library, or the course of 
improvement. 

PATIENT: My economics exam, I guess. I’m really worried about it. 

Therapist: [collecting data] Okay, can you give me an overview of 
what happened this week? How much did you study? What hap¬ 
pened with your concentration? 

PATIENT: Well, I meant to study all the time. But every time I sat down, 
I just got so nervous. Sometimes I didn’t realize that my mind had 
wandered, and I had to keep rereading the same page. 

Therapist: [continuing to collect data so I can help problem-solve and 
identify possible distortions in Sally’s thinking] When is the exam, 
and how many chapters does it cover? 

PATIENT: It’s in 2 weeks, and I think it covers the first five chapters. 

Therapist: And how many chapters have you read at least once? 

PATIENT: About three. 

Therapist: And there are still some things in these first three chapters 
that you don’t understand? 

PATIENT: A lot of things. 

Therapist: Okay. So, in a nutshell, you have an exam in 2 weeks, 
and you’re worried that you won’t understand the material well 
enough? 

Patient: Right. 

In this first part, I seek an overview of the problem. I subtly model how 

to express this problem succinctly. Next, I help Sally identify her auto¬ 
matic thoughts by having her recall a specific situation. 

Therapist: Can you remember a time this week when you thought 
about studying or tried to study, and the anxiety got really bad? 

PATIENT: Yes, sure ... last night. 

Therapist: What time was it? Where were you? 

Patient: It was about 7:30.1 was walking to the library. 

Therapist: Can you picture it in your head now? It’s 7:30, you’re walk¬ 
ing to the library.... What goes through your mind? 

PATIENT: What if I flunk the exam? What if I flunk the course? How 
will I ever make it through the semester? 


114 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: Okay, so you were able to identify your automatic thoughts. 
And how did these thoughts make you feel? Anxious? 

Patient: Very. 

Therapist: Let me tell you a little more about these automatic thoughts. 
We call them automatic because they seem just to pop into your 
mind. Most of the time, you’re probably not even aware of them; 
you’re probably much more aware of how you’re feeling emotion¬ 
ally. Even if you are aware of them, you probably don’t think to 
evaluate how accurate your thoughts are. You just accept them as 
true. 

Patient: Hmmm. 

Therapist: What you’ll learn to do here in therapy is first to identify 
your thoughts, and then judge for yourself whether they’re com¬ 
pletely true, partially true, or not true at all. {pause) Can we look at 
the first thought together? [starting the process of evaluating the 
automatic thought] What evidence do you have that you’ll flunk 
the exam? 

PATIENT: Well, I don’t understand everything. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: No ... just that I’m running out of time. 

Therapist: Okay. Any evidence that you might not flunk? 

PATIENT: Well, I did do okay on the first quiz. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: I guess I understand the first two chapters better than the 
third one. The third one is the one I’m really having trouble with. 

Therapist: [starting problem solving; having Sally take the lead] What 
could you do to learn the third chapter better? 

PATIENT: I could read it again. I could look through my lecture notes. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: {Hesitates.) I can’t think of anything. 

Therapist: Anyone else you could ask for help? 

Patient: Well, I suppose I could ask Sean; he’s the teaching assistant. 
Or maybe Ross, the guy down the hall who took this course last 
year. 

Therapist: That sounds good. Did you think of asking either of them 
for help this week? Did any automatic thoughts get in the way? 

PATIENT: No, I guess I just didn’t even think of it. 


structure and Format 


115 


Therapist: Whom do you think would he better to ask? 

Patient: Sean, I guess. 

Therapist: How likely are you to ask him? 

Patient: I will. He has office hours tomorrow morning. 

Therapist: Okay, assuming you get help this week, what do you think 
of your prediction that you might flunk? 

PATIENT: Well, I guess I do know some of the stuff. Mayhe I could get 
help with the rest. 

Therapist: And how do you feel now? 

Patient: A little less worried, I guess. 

Therapist: Okay, to summarize, you had a lot of automatic thoughts 
this week that made you feel anxious. But when you stop to evaluate 
these thoughts, it seems likely that there are some things you can 
do to pass. When you really look at the evidence and answer the 
thoughts, you feel better ... Is that right? 

PATIENT: Yeah, that’s true. 

Therapist: For homework this week. I’d like you to look for these auto¬ 
matic thoughts again when you notice your mood changing. These 
thoughts may have a grain of truth, but often I think you’ll hnd 
that they’re not necessarily completely true. Next week we’ll look 
for evidence together to hgure out whether the thoughts you wrote 
down for homework are completely accurate. Okay? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Now, identifying and evaluating thoughts is a skill for you 
to learn, like learning to drive or type. You may not be very good 
at it at hrst, but with practice you’ll get better and better. And I’ll 
teach you more about this in future sessions. See what you can do 
this week just to identify some thoughts, but don’t expect yourself 
to be good at it yet. Okay? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: One more word about this. When you write down some 
thoughts this week, remind yourself again that the thoughts may or 
may not be true. Otherwise, writing them down before you’ve learned 
to evaluate them could make you feel a little worse. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Let’s write this assignment down. And while we’re at it, let’s 
see if there’s anything else you want to do to get ready for the test. 
[See Figure 7.3.] 


116 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Jan. 29 

Read this list twice a day 

1. When I notice my mood changing, ask myself, “What's going through my 
mind right now?" and jot down my automatic thoughts (which may or may 
not be completely true). Try to do this at least once a day. 

2. It I can’t figure out my automatic thoughts, jot down just the situation. 
Remember, learning to identify my thinking is a skill I'll get better at, like 
typing. 

3. Ask Sean for help with Chapter 3 of Econ book. 

4. Read over therapy notes. 

5. Continue running/swimming. 

6. Plan 3 social activities. 

7. Daily: Add to credit list 

V_y 


FIGURE 7.3. Sally’s homework (Session 2). 


In this section, I accomplish many things at once. I address a prob¬ 
lem from the agenda that is of concern to Sally; I teach her more about 
automatic thoughts; I help her identify, evaluate, and respond to a 
specihc distressing thought; I facilitate symptom relief by decreasing 
her anxiety; and I set up a homework assignment and advise Sally to 
have realistic expectations about learning the new skill. Chapters 9-12 
describe in greater detail the process of teaching patients to identify 
and evaluate their automatic thoughts. 

Q: What if ... I don’t know how to help patients solve a particular 
problem? 

A: There are several things you can do: 

Find out how they have already tried to solve the problem and 
why it didn’t work. You may be able to modify the solution or 
modify thoughts that got in the way of the solution working. 

• Use yourself as a model. Ask yourself, “If I had this problem, 
what would I do?” 

• Ask the patient to name another person (usually a friend or 
family member) who could conceivably have the same kind of 
problem. What advice would the patient give him or her? See 
whether that advice could apply to the patient. 



structure and Format 


117 


• If you’re stuck, postpone the discussion: “I’d like to think more 
about the problem this week. Could we put it on the agenda to 
talk more about next week?” 

Also, see pages 256-258 for a further description of problem solv¬ 
ing. 


Agenda Item No. 2 

In the next section of the therapy session, I provide Sally with some 
information about the course of improvement. Having just finished a 
segment of the session, I briefly summarize first: 

Therapist: Okay, we just finished talking about your exam and how 
your automatic thoughts really made you feel anxious and inter¬ 
fered with problem solving. Next, I’d like to talk about the course 
of getting better, if that’s okay. 

Patient: Sure. 

Therapist: I’m glad you’re feeling a little less depressed today, and I 
hope you continue to feel better. But probably you won’t just feel a 
little bit better every single week until you’re back to your old self. 
You should expect to have your ups and downs. Now Tm telling 
you this for a reason. Can you imagine what you might think if you 
expected to keep feeling better and better and then one day you 
felt a lot worse? 

PATIENT: I’d probably think I would never get better. 

Therapist: That’s right. So I want you to remember that we predicted 
a possible setback, that setbacks are a normal part of getting better. 
Do you want to get down something in writing about that? 

See Chapter 18 for a more extensive discussion of relapse prevention 
and a pictorial representation of the normal course of therapy. 

Periodic Summaries 

Three kinds of summarizing are important throughout sessions. The 
first summarizes content. Patients often describe a problem with many 
details. You will summarize what they have said in the form of the cog¬ 
nitive model to ensure that you have correctly identified what is most 
troublesome to patients, and to present it in a way tbat is more concise 
and clear. You use patients’ own words as much as possible, both to 
convey accurate understanding and to keep the key difficulty activated 
in their mind: 


118 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Let me make sure I understand. You were considering get¬ 
ting a part-time job again, but then you thought, “I’ll never be able 
to handle it,” and the thought made you so sad that you turned off 
your computer and went back to bed and cried for half an hour. Is 
that right? 

Had I paraphrased the patient’s ideas and failed to use her own words 
(“Sounds like you weren’t sure if you could do well if you got a part- 
time job”), I might have lessened the intensity of the automatic thought 
and emotion, and our subsequent evaluation of the thought might then 
have been less effective. Summaries that substitute the therapist’s words 
may also lead to patients’ believing that they have not been accurately 
understood: 

PATIENT: No, it’s not that I thought I might not do well; I’m afraid I 
might not be able to handle it at all. 

You will often ask patients to make a second kind of summary after 
you have evaluated an automatic thought or belief: 

“Can you summarize what we just talked about?” 

Or 

“What do you think the main message is here?” 

Or 

“What do you think would be important for you to remember?” 

If patients do a good job of summarizing, you or they should write 
down this summary so they can read it for homework. If their summary 
misses the mark, you might say, “Well, that’s close, but I wonder if it 
would be more helpful if you remembered it this way ...” If the patient 
agrees, the latter summary is recorded in their notes. 

The third is a brief summary when a section of a session has been 
completed, so both therapist and patient have a clear understanding of 
what they have just accomplished and what they will do next: 

Therapist: Okay, so we’ve finished talking about the course of treat¬ 
ment. Next, should we talk about the problem with your cousin? 


FINAL SUMMARY AND FEEDBACK 

The goal of the final summary is to focus the patient’s attention on the 
most important points of the session in a positive way. In early sessions, 
you will generally summarize. 


structure and Format 


119 


Therapist: Well, we have just a few minutes left. Let me summarize 
what we covered today, and then I’ll ask you for your reaction to 
the session. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: It sounds like when you had more hopeful thoughts this 
week, you felt less depressed. But then your anxiety increased 
because you had all these negative thoughts about your exam. 
When we looked at the evidence that you’ll flunk, though, it seemed 
unconvincing. And you came up with a couple of good strategies to 
help your studying, some of which you’ll try between now and our 
next session. We also discussed what you should remind yourself if 
you have a setback. Finally, we talked about having you continue 
to go running. And we went over identifying and evaluating your 
automatic thoughts, which is a skill we’ll keep practicing in therapy. 
{pause) Do you think that about covers it? 

Patient: Yes. 

As the patient progresses, the therapist may ask the patient to sum¬ 
marize the most important points. Summarizing is much more easily 

accomplished if the patient has taken good notes during the session: 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, we just have a few minutes left. What do you 
think is going to be most important for you to remember this week? 
You can look at your notes. 

Following the final summary, the therapist elicits feedback about 

the session from the patient. 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, what did you think about the session today? 
Was there anything I said that bothered you? Anything you think 
I got wrong? 

PATIENT: I am a little bit worried that I could have a setback. 

Therapist: Well, a setback is possible, and if you do find yourself feel¬ 
ing significantly worse before our next session. I’d like you to call 
me and we can discuss whether you should come in sooner. On the 
other hand, you may very well have another better week. 

Patient: I hope so. 

Therapist: Should we put the topic “setbacks” on the agenda again 
next week? 

PATIENT: Yes, I think so. 


120 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Anything else about the session? Anything you want us to 

do differently next time? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: Okay. See you next week. 

If you sense that patients have not fully expressed their reaction to 
the session, you may ask them to complete a therapy report (see Figure 
5.2). When patients do express negative feedback, you will positively 
reinforce them and then try to solve the problem. If there is insufficient 
time to do so, you may apologize and tell patients that you would like 
to discuss their negative reaction at the very beginning of the following 
session. Negative feedback usually indicates difficulty in the therapeu¬ 
tic alliance (discussed more fully in J. S. Beck, 2005). 


SESSION 3 AND BEYOND 

Later therapy sessions maintain the same basic format. The content var¬ 
ies according to the patient’s problems and goals, and your therapeutic 
goals. In this section, I outline the flow of therapy across sessions. A more 
detailed description of treatment planning can be found in Chapter 19. 

As mentioned previously, you initially take the lead in helping 
patients identify and modify automatic thoughts, devising homework 
assignments, and summarizing the session. As therapy progresses, there 
is a gradual shift in responsibility. Toward the end of therapy, patients 
themselves tend to identify their distorted thinking, devise their own 
homework assignments, and summarize the session. 

Another gradual shift is from an emphasis on automatic thoughts 
to a focus on both automatic thoughts and underlying beliefs (see Chap¬ 
ters 13 and 14). As therapy moves into the hnal phase, there is another 
shift: preparing the patient for termination and relapse prevention (see 
Chapter 18). 

When planning an individual session, you are mindful of the 
stage of therapy and you continue to use your conceptualization of 
the patient to guide treatment, noting potential agenda items before 
a session. As patients report on their mood, briefly review the week, 
and specify agenda topics, you formulate in your own mind a specihc 
goal or goals for the session. For example, in Session 3, my goals for 
Sally (though not necessarily for all depressed patients) are to begin 
teaching her in a structured way to evaluate her automatic thoughts 
and to continue to schedule pleasurable activities. In Session 4, I aim 
to help Sally do some problem solving about hnding a part-time job 
and continue to respond to her dysfunctional thoughts. I continually 


structure and Format 


121 


seek to integrate my goals with Sally’s agenda items. Thus I teach her 
problem-solving and cognitive restructuring skills in the context of situ¬ 
ations she brings to therapy. This combination of solving problems and 
helping patients respond to their thoughts generally allows the novice 
therapist sufficient time to discuss in depth only about two problematic 
situations from the agenda during a given therapy session. Experienced 
therapists can often cover more. 

To rehne your conceptualization, to keep track of what is being 
covered in a therapy session, and to plan future sessions, you take notes 
during the session (see Figure 7.4) and keep a copy of notes the patient 
takes. It is useful to note the problem (s) discussed, dysfunctional 
thoughts and beliefs written verbatim (and the degree to which the 
patient initially believed them), interventions made in session, newly 
restructured thoughts and beliefs (and the degree of belief in them), 
the assigned homework, and topics for the agendas of future sessions. 
Even experienced therapists have difficulty remembering all these 
important items without written notes. 


Therapy Notes 

Patient's name: Sally Date: 5/15 Session no.: 7 

Objective scores: Beck Pepression Inventory = 18, Beck Anxiety Inventory = 7, 
Hopelessness Scale = 9 

Patient's agenda: 

Problem with English paper 
Problem with roommate 

Therapist's objectives: 

Continue to modify perfectionist thinking. 

Decrease anxiety and avoidance around participating in class. 

Session highiights: 

1. Feeling less depressed and anxious this week. 

2. Situation/problem Automatic thought Emotion 

English paper due tomorrow -> It’s not good enough. -> Anxious 

Intervention—^Thought Record (attached) 

Outcome—Anxiety (reduced) 

(cont.) 

V_ J 


FIGURE 7.4. Therapy notes. 








122 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


3. Old belief: 


Intervention: 

Outcome: 


If I don’t get an A, it means I don’t have what it takes to be 
a success. 90% [strength of belief] 

Advice to Rebecca (friend) 

00% [rerating strength of belief] 


Intervention 2: Intellectual-emotional role play 

Outcome: 60%. [rerating strength of belief] 


New belief: 


I don’t need all A’s to succeed now or in the future. 60% 


4. Coping card about asking (questions after class (attached). 

5. Roommate problem—too noisy at night 
Intervention—role-played how to approach roommate 

Homework: [If written on a separate piece ot paper, attach instead.] 

Thought Record and credit list. 

Read therapy notes and think about old and new beliefs about success. 

Read coping cards in the morning and as needed 
Ask 1 or 2 questions after class. 

Spend one more hour to edit English paper. 

Ask roommate to be quieter at night. 

Future sessions: 

See how perfectionism affects other parts of life. 

R J 


FIGURE 7.4. (cont.) 


As you take notes, you maintain eye contact as much as possible. It 
is important at times, especially when patients are revealing emotion¬ 
ally painful material, not to take notes so you can be more fully present 
with the patient. 

This chapter outlined the structure and format of a typical early 
therapy session and briefly described therapy across sessions. The fol¬ 
lowing chapter discusses problems in following the prescribed format, 
while Chapter 19 describes in detail how to plan treatment before indi¬ 
vidual sessions, within sessions, and across sessions. 



Chapter 8 

^30 


PROBLEMS WITH STRUCTURING 
THE THERAPY SESSION 


P roblems invariably arise in structuring sessions. When you become 
aware of a problem, you will specify it, conceptualize why the prob¬ 
lem arose, and devise a solution. If you have correctly diagnosed the 
patient and developed a sound treatment plan but still have difficulties 
in structuring sessions, you should check on the following: 


• Have you failed to gently interrupt the patient to direct the session? 

• Have you failed to socialize the patient into treatment? 

• Have you failed to sufficiently engage the patient in treatment or to 
develop a strong therapeutic alliance? 


These difficulties are described in this chapter. Then problems and 
remedies for each segment of a typical session are offered. 


THERAPIST COGNITIONS 

If you are a novice therapist or a therapist experienced in a less direc¬ 
tive modality, you may have interfering cognitions about structure, 
interrupting patients, and implementing the standard structure. 


123 



124 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Automatic Thoughts 

“I can’t structure the session.” 

“[My patient] won’t like the structure.” 

“She can’t express herself succinctly.” 

“He’ll get mad if I’m too directive.” 

“I shouldn’t interrupt her.” 

“He won’t do homework.” 

“She'll feel invalidated if I evaluate her thinking.” 


You should monitor your own level of discomfort and identify your 
automatic thoughts during and between sessions. You can then identify 
a problem, evaluate and respond to your thoughts, and problem-solve 
to make it easier for you to experiment with implementing the standard 
structure at the next session. 


INTERRUPTING THE PATIENT 

To structure sessions effectively so therapy can proceed most efficiently, 
you need to use gentle interruption. In the following transcript, the 
therapist hnds himself feeling slightly overwhelmed by the patient’s out¬ 
pouring of problems. He uses his own emotional reaction as a cue to 
interrupt and structure the patient. 

PATIENT: And then, I couldn’t believe it, but my sister told me—told 
me!—that I had to go help out Mom. She knows that I can’t do 
that. I mean, my mother and I have never gotten along. If I go over, 
she’ll just bombard me with stuff to do. And she’ll criticize me. I 
just can’t take any more criticism. I get it all day at work and ... 

Therapist: Can I interrupt you for a minute? I want to make sure I get 
what’s been going on. We started talking about holiday plans and 
what you should do and then you described a few more problems. 
Which do you think would be most important to work on? Holiday 
plans, your sister, mom, or work? 

I Q: What if... patients get upset when you interrupt? 

A: If they do not spontaneously tell you that your interruptions were 
distressing, ask them what was just going through their minds 
when you notice a negative affect shift. If they fail to identify their 



Problems with Structuring the Session 


125 


automatic thoughts, you can offer your hypothesis: “I was won¬ 
dering whether you thought I was interrupting you too much?” 
Once you ascertain that interrupting has been a problem, posi¬ 
tively reinforce them: “It’s good you told me that.” Next, apolo¬ 
gize; simply say, “I’m sorry.” (An apology is in order because you 
have apparently misgauged how much interruption they could 
tolerate.) Then solve the problem, for example, by asking patients 
if they would like to talk without interruption for the next 5 or 10 
minutes, at the end of which time you will summarize what they 
said, “Because it’s important to me that I really understand what’s 
going on with you.” 


SOCIALIZING THE PATIENT 

A second common difficulty in maintaining the prescribed structure 
can arise if you do not adequately socialize patients. Patients who are 
new to cognitive behavior therapy do not know in advance that you 
would like them to report on the week, describe their mood, and set 
the agenda in a succinct way. They do not know that you will ask them 
to summarize discussions of important problems, provide feedback, 
remember session content, and consistently do daily homework. In 
addition, you are essentially teaching patients certain skills and also a 
new way of relating to you (for those who have been in another type of 
therapy), or a new way of relating to their difficulties so that they can 
adopt a more objective, problem-solving orientation. Therefore, you 
must often describe, provide a rationale, and monitor with gentle, cor¬ 
rective feedback each of the session elements. 


ENGAGING THE PATIENT 

A third common difficulty arises when patients have dysfunctional 
beliefs that interfere with their ability to commit to working in treat¬ 
ment. They may not have clear goals (described in Chapter 5) that 
they really want to achieve. They may have unrealistic hopes that they 
will somehow get better without doing the work of therapy. They may 
feel hopeless about their ability to solve problems, affect their life, or 
change. They may even fear that if they get better, their life will get 
worse in some way (e.g., they will lose you as a therapist, or have to 
return to work). You need to be alert for the possibility of these kinds of 
interfering cognitions and help patients respond to them so they will be 
more amenable to the structure and tasks of treatment. 


126 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


STRENGTHENING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE 

A fourth common difficulty involves patients’ unwillingness to con¬ 
form to the prescribed structure because of their perceptions of and 
dysfunctional beliefs about themselves, about therapy, or about you. If 
you believe it will not interfere with the alliance, you may acknowledge 
patients’ discomfort, but encourage them to comply as an experiment. 
At the other end of the spectrum, you may allow the patient to domi¬ 
nate and control the flow of the session—initially. With most patients, 
however, you will negotiate a compromise satisfactory to both of you, 
and you will try, over time, to move the patient toward the standard 
structure. 

How do you determine whether the difficulty in adherence to ses¬ 
sion structure is due to faulty socialization or reluctance in comply¬ 
ing? You first intervene by further socializing patients to the cognitive 
behavior therapy model and by monitoring their verbal and nonverbal 
responses. If it is simply a problem in socialization, patients’ responses 
are fairly neutral (or perhaps slightly self-critical), and subsequent com¬ 
pliance is good. 

Therapist: Can I interrupt for a moment? Can we get back to what 
happened when you called your friend? 

Patient: Oh, sure. 

When patients react negatively, they have undoubtedly perceived your 
request in a negative way, and you need to switch gears. 

PATIENT: (irritably) But this thing with my mother is really upsetting. 

Therapist: Oh, should we spend a few minutes on your mom, then? 
We may not have time, though, to get back to talking about David. 
Is that okay? 

Problems can also arise if you impose structure in a controlling 
or demanding fashion. If patients are reluctant to provide you with 
honest feedback about how overbearing you are, you may not know you 
have made this mistake. It will be important for you to review a record¬ 
ing of the session, or better yet, have a peer, colleague, or supervisor 
review it. Then you can model apologizing, and remedy the problem at 
the next session: “I think I came across as too heavy-handed last week. 
I’m sorry, I do want to make sure that you agree with how the session 
goes.” 

Typical problems with each stage of the therapy session, excluding 
significant mistakes therapists make, are presented below. 


Problems with Structuring the Session 


127 


MOOD CHECK 

Common problems involve patients’ failure to fill out forms, annoy¬ 
ance with forms, or difficulty in subjectively expressing (in a concise 
manner) their general mood during the week. If the difficulty is sim¬ 
ply faulty socialization relating to completing the forms, you can ask 
patients whether they remember and agree with the rationale for fill¬ 
ing them out, and determine whether there’s a practical difficulty that 
needs to be resolved (e.g., insufficient time, forgetting, or a problem in 
literacy). 

When patients are annoyed by the request to fill out the forms, you 
can ask for their automatic thoughts when thinking about or actually 
filling them out, or you can ask for the significance of the situation: 
“What’s the worst part about them?” Or “What does it mean that I’ve 
asked you to fill out these forms?” You can then empathically respond 
to patients’ concerns, help them evaluate relevant thoughts and beliefs, 
and/or do problem solving. These responses are provided in the three 
examples below. 

PATIENT: These forms don’t really seem to apply to me. Half of the 
questions are irrelevant. 

Therapist: Yes, I know. But actually they’re helpful to me—I can look 
at them quickly and get the overall picture, and not bother you 
with dozens of questions. Would you be willing to fill them out 
again next week, and we can talk more about them then if they still 
bother you? 

In the next example, the patient clearly expresses his annoyance 
through his choice of words, tone of voice, and body language. 

PATIENT: These forms are a waste of time. Half the questions are irrel¬ 
evant. 

Therapist: What’s the worst part about filling them out? 

PATIENT: I’m busy. I have a lot to do. If my life fills up with meaningless 
tasks. I’ll never get anything done. 

Therapist: I can see you feel pretty irritated. How long does it take to 
fill out these forms? 

PATIENT: ... I don’t know. A few minutes, I guess. 

Therapist: I know some of the items don’t apply, but actually they save 
us time in the therapy session because I don’t have to ask you lots 
of questions myself. Could we try to problem-solve and see where 
you could fit in the time to do them? 


128 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: I guess it’s not that big a deal. I’ll do them. I’ll just leave work 
a little earlier next time. 

Here I avoided directly evaluating the accuracy of the patient’s 
automatic thoughts, because he is annoyed and I sense that he will per¬ 
ceive such questioning in a negative way. Instead I provide a rationale 
and help the patient realize that the task is not as time consuming as he 
has perceived it to be. 

In a third case, I judge that further persuasion to hll out forms will 
negatively affect a tenuous therapeutic alliance. 

PATIENT: {in an angry voice) I hate these forms. They don’t apply to me. 
I know you want me to hll them out, but I’m telling you, they’re 
worthless. 

Therapist: Let’s skip them, then, at least for the time being. I would 
like to get a clear idea of how you’ve been feeling during the week, 
though. Maybe you could just rate your emotions on a 0 to 100 or 
0 to 10 scale. 

A different problem involves patients’ difficulty in subjectively 
expressing their mood, either because they do not do so concisely, or 
because they have difficulty labeling their moods. You might gently 
interrupt, and either ask specihc questions or demonstrate to them how 
to respond. 

Therapist: Can I interrupt for a moment? Can you tell me in just a 
sentence how your mood has been this week as compared to last 
week? I do want to hear more about the problem with your brother 
in a few minutes, but hrst I just need to know whether you’ve gener¬ 
ally felt better, worse, or the same compared to last week. 

PATIENT: A little worse, I think. 

Therapist: More anxious? More sad? More angry? 

PATIENT: Maybe a little more anxious. About the same amount of sad. 
Not angry really. 

When patients have difficulty labeling their moods, you might 
respond differently: 

Therapist: It sounds like it’s hard to pin down how you’ve been feel¬ 
ing. Maybe we should put on the agenda “identifying feelings.” 

During the session, you might use the techniques described in 
Chapter 10 to teach patients to specify their mood. 


Problems with Structuring the Session 


129 


BRIEF UPDATE 

A common difficulty arises when patients provide too detailed an 
account of or unfocused rambling about their week. After several such 
sentences, you should gently jump in: 

Therapist: Can I interrupt you for a moment? Right now, I just need 
to get the big picture of how you’ve been feeling. Could you just tell 
me about your week in two or three sentences? Was it generally a 
good week? A bad week? Or did it have its ups and downs? 

If patients continue to offer details instead of the broader picture, 
you might demonstrate what you are looking for: 

Therapist: It sounds to me like you’re saying, “I had a pretty hard 
week. I had a hght with a friend, and I was really anxious about 
going out, and I had trouble concentrating on my work.” Is that 
right? 

Some patients do understand and are capable of providing a con¬ 
cise review, but do not choose to do so. If you have data to suggest that 
questioning patients about their reluctance to comply could damage 
the alliance, you may initially allow them to control the update por¬ 
tion of the session. (Such data might include patients’ verbal and/or 
nonverbal reactions to your prior attempts at structuring, their direct 
statements of strong preferences in the therapeutic process, or their 
reports of a strong reaction in the past when they have perceived others 
as controlling or dominating.) 

Extreme reactions to structuring are not common, however. Usu¬ 
ally you can matter-of-factly elicit reasons for patients’ reluctance, and 
then problem-solve. After asking patients to review their week more 
concisely and noting a negative shift in affect, you might ask, “When 
I just asked you to give me the big picture, what went through your 
mind?” Having identihed patients’ automatic thoughts, you might then 
(1) help them evaluate the validity of their thoughts, (2) use the down¬ 
ward arrow technique (see pages 206-208) to uncover the meaning 
of their thoughts, and/or (3) make an empathic statement and move 
straight to problem solving, as below: 

Therapist: I’m sorry you felt I cut you off again. I can see you have a lot 
on your mind, and I would like to hear it. Do you want to continue 
with the update now, or should we put “update of week” on the 
agenda? I just want to make sure I know all the problems you want 
to talk about today. 


130 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


This latter choice is usually better than helping patients evalu¬ 
ate their thoughts at the moment if they are particularly annoyed. By 
expressing your concern and willingness to compromise, you can often 
modify patients’ perception that you are being too controlling. 


BRIDGE BETWEEN SESSIONS 

A problem arises when patients provide too much or too little informa¬ 
tion. For example, when asked to relate important events in the preced¬ 
ing week, patients can give too detailed an account, necessitating gentle 
interruption by the therapist. Or they may shrug or say that they cannot 
think of anything, and you either need to ask a more pointed question 
(“What happened when you went to see the professor?”) or return to 
this question a little later on, if you have not collected the data you need. 
Patients may also have difficulty recalling the important points from the 
previous session, particularly if you neglected to send them home with 
therapy notes, or if they failed to read their notes for homework. 

Typical difficulties in setting the agenda arise when patients fail to 
contribute to the agenda, ramble when setting the agenda, or are hope¬ 
less about discussing problems on the agenda. Patients who fail to con¬ 
tribute to the agenda may be inadequately socialized (or too confused 
to name specific problems), or they may put a special negative meaning 
on contributing. These two cases are illustrated below. 

Therapist: What problem or problems do you want my help in solving 
today? 

PATIENT: ... I don’t know. 

Therapist: What problems came up for you this past week? Or what 
problems do you expect might come up this week? 

Patient: I don’t know. Things are status quo, I guess. 

Therapist: When did you feel worst this week? 

Patient: (Thinks.) I don’t know. The whole week was terrible. 

Therapist: Do you think you felt worst during the day, when you were 
at work? Or in the evenings? 

Patient: In the evenings, I guess. 

Therapist: Okay, can we put “evenings” on the agenda to see if there’s 
anything we can do to make them a little better? 

Patient: All right. 

At the end of the session, I will ask the patient to add a homework 
assignment to his list, to think about what problems he wants help in 


Problems with Structuring the Session 


131 


solving at the next session. If he fails to contribute to the agenda the fol¬ 
lowing week, even in the face of an update that suggests he did experi¬ 
ence some difficulties, I might elicit his automatic thoughts about and/ 
or the meaning of my request. 

Therapist: Were you able to think about problems you want help 
with? 

PATIENT: (in a slightly annoyed tone) I thought about it. But I didn’t come 
up with anything. 

Therapist: How were you feeling when you were thinking about it? 
Annoyed? 

Patient: Maybe a little. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I’m just not sure that this therapy is right for me. 

Therapist: It’s good you told me that. Do you have a sense of what 
might help you more? 

PATIENT: My last therapist just let me talk about whatever I wanted. He 
didn’t make me decide at the beginning. 

Therapist: So when I ask you to name problems you want help with, 
do you feel kind of hemmed in? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I guess it does. 

Therapist: So let’s hgure out together how to make it better. Would 
you like to skip setting the agenda at the very beginning of our ses¬ 
sions? How would it be if you came in and talked about whatever 
you want for the hrst 10 minutes? Then I’d like to summarize what 
you said so I can make sure I really understood you. Then maybe 
we could pick something out from what you’ve said to focus on for 
the next part of the session, {pause) How does that sound? 

Patient: It sounds better. 

Therapist: Is there anything else that bothers you about this ther¬ 
apy? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: Could you be sure to let me know if you think of some¬ 
thing? 

Patient: Okay. 

This patient’s response was unusual. Most patients are much more eas¬ 
ily socialized into agenda setting. But in this case, I recognized that 
pushing the patient further might alienate him, so I demonstrated my 
desire to collaboratively “hx” the problem. He needed more flexibility 


132 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


in session structure initially, but I moved him toward a more standard 
structure as soon as I could. 

Patients who ramble during agenda setting or launch into a detailed 
account of a problem instead of naming it usually just require further 
instruction. 

Therapist: {gently interrupting) Can I interrupt you for a moment? 

Should we call this “problem with boss”? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Good. Can you tell me the name of any other problem 
you’d like my help in solving? 

Patients who persist in the next session in describing problems 
rather than just naming them during agenda setting can be asked to jot 
down their agenda topics for homework (see Figure 7.1, page 102). 

A third problem in agenda setting arises when patients feel hope¬ 
less about discussing their problems. Here 1 try to get the patient into a 
problem-solving mode. 

Therapist: Okay. So on the agenda so far, we’ve got the problems of 
tiredness, organizing your finances, and balancing your check¬ 
book. Anything else? 

PATIENT: (sighs) No ... Yes ... 1 don’t know ... Tm so overwhelmed. 1 
don’t think any of this is going to help. 

Therapist: You don’t think talking about your problems in here will 
help? 

PATIENT: No. What’s the use? 1 mean, you can’t fix the fact that 1 owe 
too much money and I’m so tired 1 can’t even get out of bed most 
mornings—not to mention the fact that I’m making so many mis¬ 
takes at work that I’ll probably get fired. 

Therapist: Well, it’s true that we can’t fix everything at once. And you 
do have real problems that we need to work on together. Now, if we 
just have time to work on one thing today, which do you think will 
help more than the others? 

PATIENT: I don’t know ... the tiredness, maybe. If I could sleep better, 
maybe I could get more done. 

In this case, I give the patient the message that his problems are real, 
that they can be worked on one by one, and that he need not work on 
them alone. Asking him to make a forced choice does help him focus on 
selecting a problem, and seems to help him get oriented toward prob- 


Problems with Structuring the Session 


133 


lem solving. Had the patient refused to make a choice, I might have 
tried a different tactic: 

Therapist: It sounds like you’re feeling pretty hopeless. I don’t know 
for sure that working together we can make a difference, but I’d 
like to try. Would you be willing to try? Could we talk about the 
tiredness for a few minutes and see what happens? 

Acknowledging his hopelessness and my inability to guarantee success 
increased the patient’s willingness to experiment with problem solv¬ 
ing. 


REVIEW OF HOMEWORK 

A typical problem arises when therapists, in their haste to get to patients’ 
agenda issues, fail to ask patients about the homework they did over the 
past week. You are more likely to remember to ask about homework if 
you keep it as a standard agenda item and if you review your therapy 
notes from the previous session before patients enter your office. The 
opposite problem sometimes arises when the therapist reviews home¬ 
work (unrelated to the patient’s distress that day) in too much detail 
before turning to the patient’s agenda topics. Other homework prob¬ 
lems are discussed in detail in Chapter 17. 


DISCUSSION OF AGENDA ITEMS 

Typical problems here include hopelessness, unfocused or tangential 
discussion, inefficient pacing, and the failure to make a therapeutic 
intervention. Unfocused discussion usually results when you fail to struc¬ 
ture the discussion appropriately through gentle interruptions (guid¬ 
ing the patient back to the issue at hand); when you fail to emphasize 
key automatic thoughts, emotions, beliefs, and behaviors; and when you 
fail to summarize frequently. In the following transcript, I summarize 
several minutes of the patient’s description in just a few words and redi¬ 
rect the patient to identify her automatic thoughts. 

Therapist: Let me just make sure I understand. You had a hght with 
your sister yesterday. This reminded you of previous hghts, and you 
began to get more and more angry. Last night you called her again, 
and she began to criticize you for not helping out with your mother. 
Is that right? 


134 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: What went through your mind as she said, “You’re the 
black sheep of the family”? 

Pacing is often a problem when you overestimate how many issues 
can be discussed during one therapy session. It is preferable to priori¬ 
tize and then to specify two problems (or possibly a third) to be dis¬ 
cussed during a session, especially if you are a novice cognitive behavior 
therapist. Together you and the patient should keep track of the time, 
and collaboratively decide what to do if time is running short. In practi¬ 
cal terms, it is advisable to have two clocks (one for each of you to eas¬ 
ily see) so you can encourage patients to monitor the passage of time 
along with you: 

Therapist: We only have 10 minutes left before we have to start hnish- 
ing up the session. Would you like to continue talking about this 
problem with your neighbor, or hnish up in the next minute or two 
so we have time to discuss the problem with your coworker? 

A third problem with discussion of problems is the therapist’s failure 
to make a therapeutic intervention. Much of the time, merely describing a 
problem or identifying dysfunctional thoughts or beliefs related to the 
problem will not result in the patient’s feeling better. You should be con¬ 
scious of your goal to help patients (during the session itself) respond 
to their dysfunctional cognitions, solve or partially solve a problem, and 
set up homework assignments designed to ameliorate the problem or 
help them feel less distressed. Throughout the session, you should ask 
yourself: 


“How can I help the patient feel better by the end of the session?” 
“How can I help the patient have a better week?” 


SETTING NEW HOMEWORK 

Patients are less likely to do homework when the therapist: 


Suggests an assignment that is too difficult or is unrelated to the 
patient’s concerns. 

Fails to provide a good rationale. 







Problems with Structuring the Session 


135 


Forgets to review homework assigned during previous sessions. 
Does not stress the importance of daily homework in general and 
of specific assignments. 

• Does not explicitly teach the patient how to do the assignment. 
Does not start the assignment in session, do covert rehearsal 
(pages 303-305), or ask standard questions about potential 
obstacles that might get in the way. 

Does not have the patient write down the homework assignment. 
Noncollaboratively sets a homework assignment that the patient 
does not want to do. 


If none of the above is true, you will try to ascertain whether 
patients hold dysfunctional beliefs about homework (e.g., “I should feel 
better without working hard”; “My therapist should cure me without 
my having to change things”; “I’m too incompetent to do homework”; 
“Homework is trivial and won’t get me better”). You then help patients 
specify and test their dysfunctional ideas about homework. Homework 
is discussed more extensively in Chapter 17. 


FINAL SUMMARY 

You will periodically make summaries throughout the session to make 
sure you understand what patients have been expressing. If you have 
followed standard procedure and you have made sure the important 
points of the session are recorded as you go along, then the end sum¬ 
mary can consist of a quick review of these notes and a verbal summary 
of any other topics that were discussed and of the homework assign¬ 
ments. Without therapy notes to refer to, patients usually experience 
difficulty summarizing the session and remembering the important 
conclusions they drew. 


FEEDBACK 

Problems arise when patients are distressed at the end of a session 
and you have not left sufficient time to resolve their distress, or when 
patients are upset but fail to relate their distress to you. A practical 
solution to avoid running out of time is to start closing down the ses¬ 
sion 5-10 minutes before the end. You can then more effectively review 
homework already assigned, discuss whether any other assignments 





136 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


might be helpful, summarize the session or ask patients to do so, and 
elicit and respond to feedback. A sample response to negative feedback 
follows: 

Therapist: What did you think about today’s session? Was there any¬ 
thing I got wrong? Or did I say anything that bothered you? 
PATIENT: I don’t think you realize how hard it is for me to get things 
done. I have so many responsibilities and so many problems. It’s 
easy for you to say I should just concentrate on my work and forget 
all about what’s happening with my boss. 

Therapist: Oh, it’s good you told me—and I’m sorry you got that 
impression. What I meant to get across was that I realize you are 
very distressed by the problem with your boss. I wish we had time 
to talk about that problem now. {pause) But meanwhile, was there 
something I said or did that made you think I was suggesting that 
you just forget all about the problem with your boss? 

Next, I clarihed the misunderstanding, and we agreed to put the prob¬ 
lem on the agenda at our next session. 

Therapists at all levels of experience encounter difficulties in struc¬ 
turing with particular patients. Careful review of your session tapes 
can be invaluable in identifying and then solving these problems. A 
more extensive account of how to conceptualize and modify problems 
patients present in session can be found inj. S. Beck (2005). 


Chapter 9 

^30 

IDENTIFYING AUTOMATIC 
THOUGHTS 


T he cognitive model states that the interpretation of a situation 
(rather than the situation itself), often expressed in automatic 
thoughts, influences one’s subsequent emotion, behavior, and physio¬ 
logical response. Of course, certain events are almost universally upset¬ 
ting: for example, a personal assault or rejection. People with psycho¬ 
logical disorders, however, often misconstrue neutral or even positive 
situations, and thus their automatic thoughts are biased. By critically 
examining their thoughts and correcting thinking errors, they often 
feel better. 

This chapter describes the characteristics of automatic thoughts. 
Then it describes how to: 


• Explain automatic thoughts to patients. 

• Elicit and specify automatic thoughts. 

• Teach patients to identify automatic thoughts. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 

Automatic thoughts are a stream of thinking that coexists with a more 
manifest stream of thought (Beck, 1964). These thoughts are not pecu- 


137 



138 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


liar to people with psychological distress; they are an experience com¬ 
mon to us all. Most of the time we are barely aware of these thoughts, 
although with just a little training we can easily bring these thoughts 
into consciousness. When we become aware of our thoughts, we may 
automatically do a reality check if we are not suffering from psychologi¬ 
cal dysfunction. 

A reader of this text, for example, while focusing on the content of 
this chapter, may have the automatic thought, “I don’t understand this,” 
and feel slightly anxious. He may, however, spontaneously (i.e., without 
conscious awareness) respond to the thought in a productive way: “I do 
understand some of it; let me just reread this section.” 

This kind of automatic reality testing and responding to negative 
thoughts is a common experience. People who are in distress, however, 
may not engage in this kind of critical examination. Cognitive behavior 
therapy teaches them tools to evaluate their thoughts in a conscious, 
structured way, especially when they are upset. 

Sally, for example, when she is reading an Economics chapter, has 
the same thought as the reader above: “I don’t understand this.” Her 
thinking becomes more extreme, however: “And I’ll neuerunderstand it.” 
She accepts these thoughts as correct and feels quite sad. After learning 
tools of cognitive behavior therapy, however, she is able to use her nega¬ 
tive emotion as a cue to look for, identify, and evaluate her thoughts, 
and develop an adaptive response: “Wait a minute, it’s not necessarily 
true that I’ll never understand this. I am having some trouble now. But 
if I reread it or come back to it when I’m fresher, I may understand it 
more. Anyway, understanding it isn’t crucial to my survival, and I can 
ask someone else to explain it to me if need be.” 

Although automatic thoughts seem to pop up spontaneously, they 
become fairly predictable once the patient’s underlying beliefs are 
identihed. You are concerned with identifying those thoughts that are 
dysfunctional—that is, those that distort reality, are emotionally dis¬ 
tressing, and/or interfere with patients’ ability to reach their goals. Dys¬ 
functional automatic thoughts are almost always negative unless the 
patient is manic or hypomanic, has a narcissistic personality, or is a 
substance abuser. 

Automatic thoughts are usually quite brief, and patients are often 
more aware of the emotion they feel as a result of their thoughts than of 
the thoughts themselves. Sitting in session, for example, patients may 
be somewhat aware of feeling anxious, sad, irritated, or embarrassed, 
but unaware of their automatic thoughts until their therapist questions 
them. 

The emotions patients feel are logically connected to the content 
of their automatic thoughts. For example, a patient thinks, “I’m such 
a dope. I don’t really understand what everyone [at the meeting] is 


Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


139 


saying,” and feels sad. Another time he thinks, “She [my wife] doesn’t 
appreciate me,” and feels angry. When he has the thoughts, “What if 
my loan doesn’t go through? What will I do next?” the patient feels 
anxious. 

Automatic thoughts are often in “shorthand” form, but can be eas¬ 
ily spelled out when you ask for the meaning of the thought. For exam¬ 
ple, when a patient had the thought, “Oh, no!” the meaning was, “[My 
boss] is going to give me too much work.” “Damn!” for another patient 
was the expression of the idea, “I was stupid to leave my cell phone at 
home.” 

Automatic thoughts may be in verbal form, visual form (images), 
or both. In addition to his verbal automatic thought (“Oh, no!”), 
the patient above had an image of himself, alone at his desk late at 
night, toiling over taxes (see Chapter 16 for a description of automatic 
thoughts in imaginal form). 

Automatic thoughts can be evaluated according to their validity 
and their utility. The most common type of automatic thought is dis¬ 
torted in some way and occurs despite objective evidence to the con¬ 
trary. A second type of automatic thought is accurate, but the conclusion 
the patient draws may be distorted. For example, “I didn’t do what I 
promised [a friend] ” is a valid thought, but the conclusion, “Therefore 
I’m a bad person,” is not. 

A third type of automatic thought is also valid, but decidedly dys¬ 
functional. For example, Sally was studying for an exam and thought, 
“It’s going to take me hours to hnish this. I’ll be up until 3:00 A.M.” This 
thought was undoubtedly accurate, but it increased her anxiety and 
decreased her concentration and motivation. A reasonable response to 
this thought would address its utility. “It’s true it will take a long time to 
hnish this, but I can do it; I’ve done it before. Dwelling on how long it 
will take makes me feel miserable, and I won’t concentrate as well. It’ll 
probably take even longer to hnish. It would be better to concentrate 
on hnishing one part at a time and giving myself credit for having hn- 
ished it.” Evaluating the validity and/or utility of automatic thoughts 
and adaptively responding to them generally produces a positive shift 
in affect. 

To summarize, automatic thoughts coexist with a more manifest 
stream of thoughts, arise spontaneously, and are not based on rehection 
or deliberation. People are usually more aware of the associated emo¬ 
tion but, with a little training, they can become aware of their thinking. 
The thoughts relevant to personal problems are associated with specific 
emotions, depending on their content and meaning. They are often 
brief and heeting, in shorthand form, and may occur in verbal and/or 
imaginal form. People usually accept their automatic thoughts as true, 
without reflection or evaluation. Identifying, evaluating, and respond- 


140 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


ing to automatic thoughts (in a more adaptive way) usually produces a 
positive shift in affect. 


EXPLAINING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS TO PATIENTS 

It is desirable to explain automatic thoughts hy using the patient’s own 

examples. In the context of discussing a specihc problem with a patient, 

you will elicit the automatic thoughts associated with the problem. 

Therapist: [moving to the hrst agenda topic] Should we talk about 
how upset you were at the park yesterday? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: How were you feeling emotionally: Sad? Anxious? Angry? 

Patient: Sad. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: [further describing the situation instead of relating her auto¬ 
matic thoughts] I was looking at the people in the park, hanging 
out, playing Frisbee, things like that. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind when you saw them? 

PATIENT: I’ll never be like them. 

Therapist: Okay, [providing psychoeducation] Youjust identihed what 
we call an automatic thought. Everyone has them. They are thoughts 
that just seem to pop into our heads. We’re not deliberately try¬ 
ing to think about them; that’s why we call them automatic. Most 
of the time, they’re very quick and we’re much more aware of the 
emotion—in this case, sadness—than we are of the thoughts. Lots 
of times the thoughts are distorted in some way. But we react as if 
they’re true. 

Patient: Hmmm. 

Therapist: What we’ll do is teach you to identify your automatic 
thoughts, and then evaluate them to see just how accurate they 
are. For example, in a minute we’ll evaluate the thought, “I’ll never 
be like them.” What do you think would happen to your emotions 
if you discovered that your thought wasn’t true—that when your 
depression lifts you’ll realize that you are like the people in the 
park? 

Patient: I’d feel better. 

Here I suggest an alternative scenario in order to illustrate the cogni¬ 
tive model. Later in the session, I use Socratic questioning (see Chapter 


Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


141 


11) to examine the thought with the patient so she can develop her 
own adaptive response. In the next part, 1 write down the automatic 
thought, emphasizing the cognitive model. 


Situation: Looking at people at the park 
1 

Automatic thought: “I’ll never be like them." 
1 

Emotion: Sad 


Therapist: Let’s get that down on paper. When you have the thought, 
“I’ll never be like them,” you feel sad. Do you see how what you’re 
thinking influences how you feel? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: That’s what we call the cognitive model. What we’ll do in 
therapy is teach you to identify your automatic thoughts when you 
notice your mood changing. That’s the hrst step. We’ll keep practic¬ 
ing it until it’s easy. Then you’ll learn how to evaluate your thoughts 
and change your thinking if it’s not completely right. Is that clear? 

Patient: 1 think so. 

Therapist: [checking on the patient’s understanding] Could you tell 
me in your own words about the relationship between thoughts 
and feelings? 

PATIENT: Sometimes I have thoughts that are wrong and these thoughts 
make me feel bad ... But what if the thoughts are right? 

Therapist: Good point. Then we’ll do some problem solving or hnd 
out what’s so bad about it if they are right. My guess, though, is 
that we’ll hnd a lot of mistakes in your thinking because you are 
depressed. Unrealistically negative thinking is always part of depres¬ 
sion. In any case, we’ll hgure out together whether your thoughts 
are right or wrong. 

At the end of this session, I check again to ascertain how well the 

patient seems to understand the cognitive model. 

Therapist: To review a bit, could you tell me what you now understand 
about the relationship between thoughts and feelings? 

PATIENT: Well, sometimes automatic thoughts just pop into my head 
and I accept them as true. And then I feel ... whatever: sad, wor¬ 
ried ... 



142 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Good. How about for homework this week if you look for 
some of these automatic thoughts? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Why do you think Tm suggesting this? 

PATIENT: Because sometimes my thoughts aren’t true, and if I can fig¬ 
ure out what Tm thinking, I can change it around and feel better. 

Therapist: That’s right. Okay, let’s write this assignment down: When¬ 
ever I notice a change in mood or my mood is getting worse, ask 
myself... Do you remember the question? 

PATIENT: What was just going through my mind? 

Therapist: Good! Get that down. 


ELICITING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 

The skill of learning to identify automatic thoughts is analogous to 
learning any other skill. Some patients (and therapists) catch on quite 
easily and quickly. Others need much more guidance and practice to 
identify automatic thoughts and images. The basic question you will 
ask is: 


“What was going through your mind?" 


You will ask this question: 

• When patients describe a problematic situation that arose, usu¬ 
ally since your previous session together, or 

• When you notice a shift to, or intensification of, negative affect 
during a session. 

This latter situation is often important and it is vital to be alert to 
both verbal and nonverbal cues from the patient, so as to be able to 
elicit their “hot cognitions”—that is, important automatic thoughts and 
images that arise in the therapy session itself, and are associated with a 
change or increase in emotion. These hot cognitions may be about the 
patient herself (“I’m such a failure”), the therapist (“She doesn’t under¬ 
stand me”), or the subject under discussion (“It’s not fair that I have 
so much to do”) and may undermine the patient’s motivation or sense 
of adequacy or worth. They may interfere with the patient’s concentra¬ 
tion in session. Finally, they may interfere with the therapeutic relation- 



Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


143 


ship. Identifying automatic thoughts on the spot gives the patient the 
opportunity to test and respond to the thoughts immediately, so as to 
facilitate the work in the rest of the session. 

How do you know when patients have experienced an affect shift? 
You are on the alert for nonverbal cues such as changes in facial expres¬ 
sion, tightening of muscles, shifts in posture, or hand gestures. Verbal 
cues include change in tone, pitch, volume, or pace. Having noticed a 
change, you infer an affect shift and check it out by asking patients what 
just went through their mind. 

Difficulties in Eliciting Automatic Thoughts 

If patients are unable to answer the question “What was just going 
through your mind?” you can: 


1. Ask them how they are/were feeling and where in their body they 
experienced the emotion. 

2. Elicit a detailed description of the problematic situation. 

3. Request that the patient visualize the distressing situation. 

4. Suggest that the patient role-play the specific interaction with you 
(if the distressing situation was interpersonal). 

5. Elicit an image. 

6. Supply thoughts opposite to the ones you hypothesize actually 
went through their minds. 

7. Ask for the meaning of the situation. 

8. Phrase the question differently. 


These techniques are illustrated in the transcripts below. 


Heightening the Emotional and Physiological Response 

Therapist: Sally, when you were thinking about volunteering in class, 
what was just going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: How were you feeling? 

Patient: Anxious, I think. 

Therapist: Where did you feel the anxiety? 

Patient: Here {pointing to her abdomen). In the pit of my stomach. 
Therapist: Can you feel the same feeling now? 



144 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Patient: (Nods.) 

Therapist: So you’re sitting in class, thinking about volunteering, and 
you feel that anxiety in the pit of your stomach ... What’s going 
through your mind? 

PATIENT: If I say something, it won’t come out right. People will judge 
me. 

Eliciting a Detailed Deseription 

Therapist: So, you were alone in your room last night and you began 
feeling really upset? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. I was just feeling so down, sad. 

Therapist: Can you describe the scene for me? What time was it? Were 
you alone? What were you doing? What else was going on? 

PATIENT: It was about 6:15. I had just gotten back from dinner. The 
dorm was pretty empty because I ate early. I was about to get my 
books out of my backpack so I could do my Chem homework ... 

Therapist: So you were about to do your homework and you were 
thinking ... 

PATIENT: [expressing her automatic thoughts] This is just too hard. I’ll 
never understand it. 

Therapist: And then what happened? 

Patient: I just lay down on my bed. 

Therapist: And as you were lying there, what was going through your 
mind? 

PATIENT: I don’t want to do this. I don’t want to be here. 


Visualizing the Situation 

Therapist: Sally, can you imagine that you’re back in the class right 
now, the professor is talking, the student next to you is whispering, 
you’re feeling nervous ... Can you visualize it, as if it’s happening 
right now? How big is the class? Where are you sitting? What is the 
professor saying? What are you doing? And so on. 

PATIENT: I’m in my Economics class. The professor is standing in front 
of the class. Let’s see, [shifting to past tense, which makes the expe¬ 
rience less immediate and decreases the emotional response] I was 
sitting about three-quarters of the way back, I was listening pretty 
hard ... 


Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


145 


Therapist: [guiding the patient to speak as if it’s happening right at 
the moment] So, “I’m sitting three-quarters of the way back, I’m 
listening pretty hard .. 

PATIENT: She’s saying something about what topics we can choose, a 
macroeconomic view of the economy or ... something, and then 
this guy on my left leans over and whispers, “When’s the paper 
due?” 

Therapist: And what’s going through your mind right now? 

PATIENT: What did she say? What did I miss? Now I won’t know what 
to do. 

Re-Creating an Interpersonal Situation through Role Play 

Patients describe who said what verbally, then patients play themselves 

while you play the other person in the interaction. 

Therapist: So, you were feeling down as you were talking to your class¬ 
mate about the assignment? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind as you were talking to 
her? 

PATIENT: (Pauses.) ... I don’t know. I was just really down. 

Therapist: Can you tell me what you said to her and what she said to 
you? 

PATIENT: (Describes verbal exchange.) 

Therapist: How about if we try a role play? I’ll be the classmate and 
you be you. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: While we’re recreating the situation, see if you can hgure 
out what’s going through your mind. 

Patient: (Nods.) 

Therapist: Okay, you start. What do you say hrst? 

Patient: Lisa, can I ask you a question? 

Therapist: Sure, but can you call me later? I’ve got to run to my next 
class. 

PATIENT: It’s fast. I just missed part of what Dr. Smith said about our 
paper. 

Therapist: I’m really in a hurry now. Call me after 7 o’clock, okay? 
Bye ... Okay, out of role play. Were you aware of what was going 
through your mind? 


146 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: Yeah. I was thinking that she was too busy for me, that she 
didn’t really want to help me, and I wouldn’t know what to do. 

Therapist: You had the thoughts, “She’s too busy for me,” “She doesn’t 
really want to help me,” “I won’t know what to do.” 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: And those thoughts made you feel sad? 

Patient: Yes. 


Eliciting an Image 

Therapist: So, when I asked, “How’s school going?” you felt sad. What 
was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I think I was thinking about my Economics class, getting my 
paper back. 

Therapist: Did you imagine that? Did you have an image in your 
mind? 

PATIENT: Yeah. I pictured a “C” at the top, in red ink. 


Suggesting an Opposite Thought 

Therapist: So when you were sitting alone in your room, were you 
thinking how great everything is going? 

PATIENT: No, not at all! I was thinking that I don’t know whether I 
belong here. 


Uncovering the Meaning of the Situation 

Therapist: What did it mean to you that you got a B- on your paper? 
PATIENT: That I’m not smart enough. I don’t have what it takes. 


Phrasing the Question Differently 

Therapist: So when your mom didn’t call you back, what were you 
thinking? Were you making a prediction? Were you remembering 
something? 

It is also possible, though usually less desirable, to ask patients, “What 
do you guess what you were thinking?” or “Could you have been think¬ 
ing about_or_?” because patients may spec¬ 

ulate inaccurately. Sometimes, however, these two questions are effec¬ 
tive. 




Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


147 


You will try one or more of the techniques above when patients 
have difficulty identifying their automatic thoughts. But if they still 
experience difficulty, you might collahoratively decide to change the 
subject, to avoid patients’ feeling that they are being interrogated, or to 
reduce the possibility of their viewing themselves as a failure: 

Therapist: Well, sometimes these thoughts are hard to catch. No big 
deal. How about if we move on to_. 

Identifying Additionai Automatic Thoughts 

It is important to continue questioning patients even after they report 
an initial automatic thought. Additional questioning may bring to light 
other important thoughts. 

Therapist: So when you got the test back, you thought, “I should have 
done better. I should have studied harder.” What else went through 
your mind? 

PATIENT: Everyone else probably did better than I did. 

Therapist: Then what? 

Patient: I was thinking, “I shouldn’t even be here. I’m such a failure.” 

You should be aware that patients may, in addition, have other 
automatic thoughts not about the same situation itself, but about their 
reaction to that situation. They may perceive their emotion, behavior, or 
physiological reaction in a negative way. 

Therapist: So you had the thought, “I might embarrass myself,” and 
you felt anxious? Then what happened? 

PATIENT: My heart started beating real fast and I thought, “What’s 
wrong with me?” 

Therapist: And you felt... ? 

Patient: More anxious. 

Therapist: And then? 

Patient: I thought, “I’ll never feel okay.” 

Therapist: And you felt... ? 

Patient: Sad and hopeless. 

Therapist: And then... ? 

Patient: I felt so bad I thought I wouldn’t be much fun at lunch with 
Allison so I told her I wasn’t feeling well and just went back to my 
room. 



148 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Note that the patient hrst had automatic thoughts about a specihc 
situation (volunteering in class). Then she had thoughts about her 
anxiety and her bodily reaction. In many cases, these secondary emo¬ 
tional reactions can be quite distressing, and signihcantly compound 
an already upsetting situation. Then Sally made a negative prediction 
that affected her behavior. 

To work most efficiently, it is important to determine at which point 
patients were most distressed (before, during, or after a given incident), 
and what their automatic thoughts were at that point. Patients may have 
had distressing automatic thoughts: 


Before a situation, in anticipation of what might happen 
(“What if she yells at me?”), 

During a situation (“She thinks I'm stupid”), and/or 
After a situation, reflecting on what had happened 
(“I can't do anything right; I never should have tried”). 


Identifying the Probiematic Situation 

Sometimes, in addition to being unable to identify automatic thoughts 
associated with a given emotion, patients have difficulty even identify¬ 
ing a particular situation or issue that is most troublesome to them (or 
which part is the most upsetting). When this happens, you can help 
them pinpoint the most problematic situation by proposing a number 
of upsetting problems, asking them to hypothetically eliminate one 
problem, and determining how much relief the patient feels. Once a 
specihc situation has been identifled, the automatic thoughts are more 
easily uncovered. 

Therapist: [summarizing] So, you've been very upset for the past few 
days and you're not sure why, and you're having trouble identifying 
your thoughts—you just feel upset most of the time. Is that right? 
PATIENT: Yes. I just don't know why I've been so upset all the time. 
Therapist: What kinds of things have you been thinking about? 
PATIENT: Well, school for one. And I'm not getting along well with my 
roommate. And then I tried to get hold of my mother again and I 
couldn't reach her, and, I don't know, just everything. 

Therapist: So, there is a problem with school, with your roommate, 
with reaching your mom ... anything else? 




Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


149 


PATIENT: Yeah. I haven’t been feeling too well. I’m afraid I might be 
getting sick. 

Therapist: Which of these situations bothers you the most—school, 
roommate, reaching your mom, feeling sick? 

PATIENT: Oh, I don’t know. I’m worried about all of them. 

Therapist: Let’s jot these four things down. Now let’s say hypotheti¬ 
cally we could completely eliminate the feeling sick problem. Let’s 
say you now feel physically hne, how anxious are you now? 

PATIENT: About the same. 

Therapist: Okay. Say, hypothetically, you do reach your mom right 
away after therapy, and everything’s hne with her. How do you feel 
now? 

PATIENT: A little bit better. Not that much. 

Therapist: Okay. Let’s say the school problem—what is the school 
problem? 

PATIENT: I have a paper due next week. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s say you’ve just handed the paper in early, and 
you’re feeling good about it. Now how do you feel? 

PATIENT: That would be a great relief, if that paper were done and I 
thought I’d done well. 

Therapist: So it sounds as if it’s the paper that is the most distressing 
situation. 

PATIENT: Yeah. I think so. 

Therapist: Now, just to make sure ... If you still had the paper to do, 
but the roommate problem disappeared, how would you feel? 

PATIENT: Not that good. I think it is the paper that’s bothering me the 
most. 

Therapist: In a moment, we’ll focus on the school problem, but hrst 
I’d like to review how we hgured it out, so you’ll be able to do it 
yourself in the future. 

PATIENT: Well, you had me list all the things I was worried about, and 
pretend to solve them one by one. 

Therapist: And then you were able to see which one would give you 
the most relief if it had been resolved. 

Patient: Yeah. 

We then focus on the school problem, identifying and responding to 

automatic thoughts and doing some problem solving. 


150 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


The same process can be used in helping the patient to determine 
which part of a seemingly overwhelming problem is most distressing. 

Therapist: So you’ve been pretty upset about your roommate. What 
specifically has been bothering you? 

PATIENT: Oh, I don’t know. Everything. 

Therapist: Can you name some things? 

PATIENT: Well, she’s been taking my food and not replacing it. Not in a 
malicious way, but it still bothers me. And she’s got a boyfriend, and 
whenever she talks about him, it reminds me that I don’t have one. 
And she’s messy; she leaves stuff all around ... And she’s kind of 
inconsiderate. Sometimes she talks really loudly on her cell phone. 
Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: Those are the major things. 

Therapist: Okay, we’ve done this before. Let me read these back to you 
so you can hgure out which one bothers you the most. If you can’t, 
we’ll hypothetically eliminate them one by one, and see which one 
makes the biggest difference in how you feel. Okay? 

Differentiating between Automatic Thoughts 
and Interpretations 

When you ask for patients’ automatic thoughts, you are seeking the 
actual words or images that have gone through their mind. Until they 
have learned to recognize these thoughts, many patients report inter¬ 
pretations, which may or may not reflect their actual thoughts. In the 
following transcript, I guide a patient in reporting her thoughts. 

Therapist: When you saw that woman in the cafeteria, what went 
through your mind? 

PATIENT: I think I was denying my real feelings. 

Therapist: What were you actually thinking? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure what you mean. 

In this exchange, the patient reported an interpretation of what she was 
feeling and thinking. Below, I try again, by focusing on and heighten¬ 
ing her emotion. 

Therapist: When you saw her, what emotion did you feel? 

PATIENT: I think I was just denying my feelings. 

Therapist: Uh-huh. What feelings were you denying? 


Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


151 


PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: [supplying an emotion opposite to the expected one to jog 
her recall] When you saw her, did you feel happy? Excited? 

Patient: No, not at all. 

Therapist: Can you remember walking into the cafeteria and seeing 
her? Can you picture that in your mind? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: What are you feeling? 

Patient: Sad, I think. 

Therapist: As you look at her, what goes through your mind? 

PATIENT: [reporting an emotion and a physiological reaction, instead 
of an automatic thought] I feel really sad, an emptiness in the pit 
of my stomach. 

Therapist: What’s going through your mind now? 

PATIENT: She’s really smart, [automatic thought] I’m nothing com¬ 
pared to her. 

Therapist: Okay. Anything else? 

Patient: No. I just walked over to the table and started talking to my 
friend. 

Specifying Automatic Thoughts Embedded in Discourse 

Patients need to learn to specify the actual words that go through their 

minds in order to evaluate them effectively. Following are some exam¬ 
ples of embedded thoughts versus actual words: 


Embedded expressions 

Actual automatic thoughts 

1 guess 1 was wondering if he likes me. 

Does he like me? 

1 don’t know if going to the professor 

It’ll probably be a waste of 

would be a waste of time. 

time if 1 go. 

1 couldn’t get myself to start reading. 

1 can’t do this. 


You gently lead patients to identify the actual words that went through 
their mind. 

Therapist: So when you turned bright red in class, what went through 
your mind? 

PATIENT: I guess I was wondering if he thought I was strange. 



152 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Can you recall the exact words you were thinking? 
PATIENT: {puzzled) I’m not sure what you mean. 

Therapist: Were you thinking, “I guess I was wondering if he thought 
I was strange,” or were you thinking, “Does he think I’m strange?” 

PATIENT: Oh, I see, the second one. Or actually I think it was, “He prob¬ 
ably thinks I’m strange.” 

Changing the Form of Telegraphic or Question Thoughts 

Patients often report thoughts that are not fully spelled out. As it is dif¬ 
ficult to evaluate such a telegraphic thought, you guide the patient to 
express the thought more fully. 

Therapist: What went through your mind when the paper was 
announced? 

PATIENT: “Uh-oh.” I just thought, “Uh-oh.” 

Therapist: Can you spell the thought out? “Uh-oh” means ... 
PATIENT: I’ll never get the work done in time. I have too much to do. 

If patients are unable to spell out their thought, you might try supplying 
an opposite thought: “Did ‘Uh-oh’ mean, ‘That’s really good’?” 

Automatic thoughts are sometimes expressed in the form of a 
question, making evaluation difficult. Therefore, you guide patients in 
expressing their thoughts in a statement form prior to helping them 
evaluate it. 

Therapist: So you felt anxious? What was going through your mind 
right then? 

PATIENT: I was thinking, “Will I pass the test?” 

Therapist: Okay. Were you thinking you probably would or wouldn’t 
pass the test? 

PATIENT: That I wouldn’t. 

Therapist: Okay. So can we rephrase your thought as, “I might not 
pass the test”? 

Another example follows: 

Therapist: So you had the thought, “What will happen to me [if I get 
more and more nervous] ?” What are you afraid could happen? 
PATIENT: I don’t know ... lose control, I guess. 


Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


153 


Therapist: Okay, let’s look at that thought, “I could lose control.” 

Here I lead the patient into revealing precisely what she fears. In the 
next example, the patient initially has difficulty identifying the fear 
behind her automatic thought. I try several different questions. 

Therapist: So you thought, “What next?” What did you think would 
happen next? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: Were you afraid something specihc might happen? 
PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: What’s the worst thing that could happen in this situation? 
PATIENT: Ummm ... that I’d get kicked out of school. 

Therapist: Do you think that was what you were afraid would hap¬ 
pen? 


Other examples of how questions can be restated in order to be 
evaluated more effectively are presented below: 


Question 

Statement 

“Will 1 be able to cope?” 

“1 won’t be able to cope.” 

“Can 1 stand it if she leaves?” 

“1 won’t be able to stand it if she 
leaves.” 

“What if 1 can’t do it?” 

“I’ll lose my job if 1 can’t do it.” 

“What if she gets mad at me?” 

“She'll hurt me if she gets mad at me.” 

“How will 1 get through it?” 

“1 won’t be able to get through it.” 

“What if 1 can’t change?” 

“I’ll be miserable forever if 1 can’t 
change.” 

“Why did this happen to me?” 

“This shouldn't have happened to me.” 


Recognizing Situations That Can Evoke Automatic Thoughts 

Up to this point, most of the examples of automatic thoughts provided 
in this chapter have been associated with external events (e.g., talking 
to a friend) or a stream of thoughts (e.g., thinking about an upcoming 
exam). But a wide range of both external stimuli and internal experi¬ 
ences can give rise to automatic thoughts. As illustrated in Figure 9.1, 



154 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Situation/Stimulus 

Example 

Automatic Thoughts 

External event (or 
series of events) 

Mother keeps hanging 
up the phone. 

“How dare she treat me 
like this!” 

Stream of thoughts 

Thinking about the exam 

“I'll never learn this stuff.” 

Cognition; thought, 
image, belief, 
daydream, dream, 
memory, flashback 

Becomes aware of a 
violent image. 

Has a flashback of a 
traumatic event 

“1 must be crazy.” 

“I'll never get over this. 

I'll always be plagued by 
these terrible flashbacks.” 

Emotion 

Anger 

“1 shouldn’t be angry 
at him. I’m such a bad 
person.” 

Behavior 

Binge eats 

“I'm so weak. 1 just can't 
get my eating under 
control.” 

Physiological or 
mental experience 

Rapid heartbeat 

“What if there's something 
seriously wrong with me?” 


Sense of unreality 

“1 must be going crazy.” 


FIGURE 9.1. Situations that evoke automatic thoughts. 



FIGURE 9.2. Initial and secondary thoughts and reactions. 








Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


155 


patients may have automatic thoughts in other categories, too. They can 
have thoughts about their cognitions (thoughts, images, beliefs, day¬ 
dreams, dreams, memories, or flashbacks), their emotions, their behav¬ 
ior, or their physiological or mental experiences. Any of these stimuli 
may engender an initial automatic thought (or series of automatic 
thoughts), followed by an initial emotional, behavioral, and/or physi¬ 
ological reaction. Patients may then have additional thoughts about any 
part of the cognitive model, leading to an additional associated emo¬ 
tional, behavioral, and/or physiological reaction (Figure 9.2). 


TEACHING PATIENTS TO IDENTIFY 
AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 

As described in Chapter 5, you can begin teaching patients the skill of 
identifying automatic thoughts even during the first session. Here I have 
just demonstrated the cognitive model, using Sally’s own examples. 

Therapist: Sally, when you notice your mood changing or getting 
worse in the next week, could you stop and ask yourself, “What is 
going through my mind right now?” 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Maybe you could jot down a few of these thoughts on a 
piece of paper? 

Patient: Sure. 

In later sessions, you might also explicitly teach the patient other 
techniques if the basic question (“What’s going through your mind 
right now?”) is not effective. 

Therapist: Sometimes you may not be able to tell what you were think¬ 
ing. So either at the time or later, you can try what we just did here 
in session. Replay the scene as vividly as you can in your imagina¬ 
tion, as if it’s happening again, and concentrate on how you’re feel¬ 
ing. Then ask yourself, “What’s going through my mind?” Do you 
think you could do that? Or should we practice it again? 

Patient: I’ll give it a try. 

Again, if asking the basic questions and trying the imagery tech¬ 
nique are not sufficient, you might explicitly teach the patient to 
hypothesize about her thoughts. This method is less desirable because 
it is more likely the patient will report a later interpretation instead of 
her actual thoughts at the time. 


156 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: Ifyou still have trouble figuring outwhatwas going through 
your mind, here are some other questions [see Figure 9.3 you can 
ask yourself. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: First question: If I had to, what would I guess I 
was thinking about? Or could I have been thinking about 

_or_? Or, was I imagining something or 

remembering something? Or, finally, what does this situation mean 
to me? Or you might try to figure out what the opposite thought 
might be to jog your memory. 

Patient: Okay. 


TECHNIQUES TO ELICIT AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 

Basic question: 


What was going through your mind just then? 


To identify automatic thoughts; 

1. Ask this question when you notice a shift in (or intensification of) affect 
during a session. 

2. Have the patient describe a problematic situation or a time during which 
she experienced an affect shift and ask the above question. 

3. If needed, have the patient use imagery to describe the specific situation 
or time in detail (as if it is happening now) and then ask the above ques¬ 
tion. 

4. If needed or desired, have the patient role-play a specific interaction with 
you and then ask the above question. 

Other questions to elicit automatic thoughts: 

1. What do you guess you were thinking about? 

2. Do you think you could have been thinking about_or_? 

(Therapist provides a couple of plausible possibilities.) 

3. Were you imagining something that might happen or remembering some¬ 
thing that did? 

4. What did this situation mean to you? (Or say about you?) 

5. Were you thinking_? (Therapist provides a thought opposite to the 

expected response.) 

V___V 


FIGURE 9.3. Summary of techniques to identify automatic thoughts. From J. S. 
Beck (2011). Copyright 2011 by Judith S. Beck. Reprinted by permission. 












Identifying Automatic Thoughts 


157 


Therapist: How about trying out these questions this week if you have 
trouble identifying your automatic thoughts, and if imagining the 
situation again doesn’t help? 

Patient: Fine. 

To summarize, people with psychological disorders make predict¬ 
able errors in their thinking. You teach patients to identify their dys¬ 
functional thinking, then to evaluate and modify it. The process starts 
with the recognition of specific automatic thoughts in specific situa¬ 
tions. Identifying automatic thoughts is a skill that comes easily and 
naturally to some patients and is more difficult for others. You need 
to listen closely to ensure that patients report actual thoughts, and you 
may need to vary your questioning if patients do not readily identify 
their thoughts. The next chapter clarifies, among other things, the dif¬ 
ference between automatic thoughts and emotions. 


Chapter 10 

IDENTIFYING EMOTIONS 


E motions are of primary importance in cognitive behavior therapy. 

After all, the major goals of treatment are symptom relief (espe¬ 
cially a reduction in the patient’s level of distress) and a remission of 
the patient’s disorder. 

Intense negative emotion is painful and may be dysfunctional if 
it interferes with a patient’s capacity to think clearly, solve problems, 
act effectively, or gain satisfaction. Patients with a psychiatric disorder 
often experience an intensity of emotion that can seem excessive or 
inappropriate to the situation. Sally, for example, felt enormous guilt 
and then sadness when she had to cancel a minor social event with her 
roommate. She was also extremely anxious about going to a professor 
for help. Yet the intensity and quality of patients’ emotions make sense 
when you recognize the strength of their automatic thoughts and the 
beliefs (which are usually quite painful) that have become activated. 

It is important to acknowledge and empathize with how patients 
feel and refrain from challenging or disputing their emotions. Evaluate 
the thoughts and beliefs that underlie patients’ distress to reduce their 
dysphoria; do not evaluate their emotions. 

You won’t discuss all situations in which patients feel dysphoric, 
though—you will use your conceptualization of the patient to decide 
which problems are most important. Typically, the most important 
problems are those associated with high levels of distress. Problems in 
which patients seem to be having a “normal” level of distress are usu¬ 
ally less important. The aim of cognitive behavior therapy is not to get 


158 


Identifying Emotions 


159 


rid of all distress; negative emotions are as much a part of the richness 
of life as positive emotions and serve as important a function as does 
physical pain, often alerting us to potential problems that may need to 
he addressed. 

In addition, you will seek to increase patients’ positive emotions 
through discussion (usually relatively brief) of their interests, positive 
events that occurred during the week, and positive memories. You will 
often suggest homework assignments aimed at increasing the number 
of activities in which the patient is likely to experience mastery and 
pleasure (see Chapter 6). 

This chapter explains how to: 


Differentiate automatic thoughts from emotions. 
Distinguish among emotions. 

• Label emotions. 

• Rate the intensity of emotions. 


DISTINGUISHING AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 
FROM EMOTIONS 

Many patients do not clearly understand the difference between their 
thoughts and their emotions. You will endeavor to make sense of the 
patients’ experience and share your understanding with them. You will 
continually and subtly help patients view their experiences through the 
cognitive model. 

You will organize the material patients present into the categories 
of the cognitive model: situation, automatic thought, and reaction (i.e., 
emotion, behavior, and physiological response). Be alert to occasions 
when patients confuse their thoughts and emotions. At these times, 
based on the flow of the session, their goals, and the strength of the 
collaboration, you may decide to: 


• Ignore the confusion, 

• Address If at the time (either subtly or explicitly), or 

• Address It later. 


Most of the time, mislabeling a thought as a feeling is relatively 
unimportant in a given context, and you can make a subtle correction. 




160 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: You mentioned when we set the agenda that you wanted to 
talk about the phone call you had with your brother? 

PATIENT: Yeah. I called him a couple of nights ago and he sounded 
kind of distant. 

Therapist: And how were you feeling emotionally? 

PATIENT: I felt like he really didn’t want to talk, like he didn’t really 
care whether I had called or not. 

Therapist: So when you had the thoughts, “He doesn’t really want to 
talk. He doesn’t really care that I called,” how did you feel emotion¬ 
ally? Sad? Angry? Something else? 

In another session, I viewed the confusion as important because I 
wanted to teach Sally how to evaluate her thinking, using the Thought 
Record (page 195). I deliberately decided to distinguish the two, judg¬ 
ing that it was important to do so at the time, and that the flow of the 
session would not be unduly interrupted and that important data would 
not be forgotten. 

Therapist: Were there any times this week when you thought about 
going out for a walk? 

PATIENT: Yeah, a few times. 

Therapist: Can you remember one time specihcally? 

PATIENT: Last night after dinner, I was cleaning up ... I don’t know. 
Therapist: How were you feeling emotionally? 

PATIENT: [expressing thoughts] Oh, I was feeling like it’s no use, that it 
probably wouldn’t help. 

Therapist: Those are important thoughts. We’ll get back to evaluat¬ 
ing them in a minute, but hrst I’d like to review the difference 
between thoughts and feelings. Okay? 

Patient: Sure. 

Therapist: Feelings are what you feel emotionally —usually they’re one 
word, such as sadness, anger, anxiety, and so on. {pause) Thoughts 
are ideas that you have; you think them either in words or in pic¬ 
tures or images, {pause) Do you see what I mean? 

Patient: I think so. 

Therapist: So let’s get back to the time last night when you thought 
about going out for a walk. What emotion were you feeling? 
Patient: Sad, I think. 

Therapist: And your thoughts were, “This is no use. I’ll never get bet¬ 
ter”? 


Patient: Yes. 


Identifying Emotions 


161 


In the examples above, Sally initially labeled thoughts as feelings. 
At times, patients do the reverse: that is, they label an emotion as a 
thought. 

Therapist: As you walked into your empty dorm room, Sally, what 
went through your mind? 

PATIENT: I was sad, lonely, real down. 

Therapist: So you felt sad and lonely and down. What thought or 
image made you feel that way? 

Importance of Distinguishing among Emotions 

You continuously conceptualize patients’ problems, trying to understand 
their experience and point of view and how their underlying beliefs give 
rise to specihc automatic thoughts in a specihc situation, influencing 
their emotions and behavior. The connection among patients’ thoughts, 
emotion, and behavior should make sense. You will investigate further 
when patients report an emotion that does not seem to match the content of 
their automatic thoughts, as in the transcript below. 

Therapist: How did you feel when your mother didn’t call you back 
right away? 

Patient: I was sad. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I was thinking, “What if something happened to her? Maybe 
there’s something wrong.” 

Therapist: And you felt sad? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: I’m a little confused because those sound more like anx¬ 
ious thoughts. Was there anything else going through your mind? 
PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: How about if we have you imagine the scene? [helping the 
patient vividly recall the scene in imagery form] You said you were 
sitting by the phone, waiting for her call? 

PATIENT: And then I thought, “What if something happened? Maybe 
there’s something wrong.” 

Therapist: What happens next? 

Patient: I’m looking at the phone, and I get teary. 

Therapist: What’s going through your mind? 

PATIENT: If anything happened to Mom, there would be no one left 
who cares. 


162 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: “There would be no one left who cares.” How does that 
thought make you feel? 

Patient: Sad. Real sad. 

This interchange started with a discrepancy. I was alert and so was 
able to pick up an inconsistency between the content of the automatic 
thought and the emotion associated with it. I was then able to help Sally 
retrieve a key automatic thought by using imaginal recall. Had I cho¬ 
sen to focus on the anxious thoughts, I may have missed Sally’s cen¬ 
tral concern. Although it may have been helpful to focus on a less cen¬ 
tral thought, finding and working with key automatic thoughts usually 
speeds up therapy. 


DIFFICULTY IN LABELING EMOTIONS 

Most patients easily and correctly label their emotions. Some, how¬ 
ever, display a relatively impoverished vocabulary for emotions; others 
understand emotional labels intellectually but have difficulty labeling 
their own specific emotions. In either of these two cases, it is useful 
to have patients link their emotional reactions in specific situations to 
their labels. Devising an “Emotion Chart” such as the one in Figure 10.1 
helps patients learn to label their emotions more effectively. Patients 
can list current or previous situations in which they felt a particular 
emotion and refer back to it whenever they are having difficulty nam¬ 
ing how they felt. 

Therapist: Td like to spend a few minutes talking about different 
emotions so we can both understand better how you feel in differ¬ 
ent situations. Okay? 


l' 

Angry 

1. Brother cancels 
plans with me. 

2. Friend doesn't 
return my gym bag. 

3. Carpooi driver piays 
music too ioudiy. 

V_ 


Sad 

1. Mom doesn't return 
phone caii. 

2. Not enough money 
to go away on 
vacation. 

3. Nothing to do on 
Saturday. 


N 

Anxious 

1. Seeing how iow my 
bank account is. 

2. Hearing that we 
might have a 
tornado. 

3. Finding a bump on 
my neck. 

_ J 


FIGURE 10.1. Sample Emotion Chart. 



Identifying Emotions 


163 


Patient: Sure. 

Therapist: Can you remember a time when you felt angry? 

PATIENT: Uh, yeah ... When my brother cancelled plans to see this 
movie; I forget which one, but I really wanted to go. Anyway, he 
told me he was going out with his friends instead ... 

Therapist: And what was going through your mind? 

PATIENT: Who does he think he is? I wouldn’t do that to him. He should 
treat me better. 

Therapist: And you felt— 

Patient: Mad. 

Here I had the patient recall a specific event in which he felt a given 
emotion. From his description, it sounded as if he had correctly identi¬ 
fied his emotion. Because I wanted to make sure, I asked him to iden¬ 
tify his automatic thoughts. The content of the automatic thoughts did 
match his stated emotion. 

Next, I asked the patient to recall other occasions when he felt angry, 
sad, and anxious. Again I asked for his specific automatic thoughts in 
these situations to ensure he was accurately labeling his emotions. We 
then created the Emotion Chart (Figure 10.1). 1 asked the patient to 
refer to it in session and at home whenever he was having difficulty 
labeling what he was feeling. 

It is not necessary to use this technique to differentiate emotions 
with most patients. Others may benefit from a quick discussion along 
the above lines. A few might profit from a list of negative emotions (see 
Figure 10.2) and a brief discussion. 


Sad, down, lonely, unhappy 

Anxious, worried, fearful, scared, tense 

Angry, mad. Irritated, annoyed 

Ashamed, embarrassed, humiliated 

Disappointed 

Jealous, envious 

Guilty 

Hurt 

Suspicious 

\_y 


FIGURE 10.2. Negative emotions. 



164 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

RATING DEGREES OF EMOTION 

It is sometimes important for patients not only to identify their emo¬ 
tions, but also to quantify the degree of emotion they are experiencing. 
Some have dysfunctional beliefs about experiencing emotion (Green¬ 
berg, 2002; Holland, 2003; Leahy, 2003)—for example, believing that 
if they feel a small amount of distress, it will increase and become intol¬ 
erable. Learning to rate the intensity of emotions aids patients in test¬ 
ing this belief. 

In addition, you will assess whether questioning and adaptively 
responding to a thought or belief have been effective, so you can judge 
whether a cognition requires further intervention. Failure to do so may 
sometimes lead you to inaccurately conclude that an intervention has 
succeeded, and you may proceed to the next thought or problem pre¬ 
maturely. Or the opposite may happen—^you may continue discussing 
an automatic thought or belief, not realizing that the patient is no lon¬ 
ger signihcantly distressed by it. 

Finally, gauging the intensity of an emotion in a given situation 
helps you and the patient determine whether that situation warrants 
closer scrutiny. A situation that is relatively less emotionally laden may 
be less valuable to discuss than one that is more distressing to the 
patient, where important beliefs may have been activated. 

Most patients learn to judge the intensity of an emotion fairly eas¬ 
ily. 

Therapist: How did you feel when your friend said, “Sorry, I don’t 
have time now”? 

PATIENT: Pretty sad, I guess. 

Therapist: If 100% is the saddest you ever felt or could imagine feel¬ 
ing, and 0% is completely not sad, how sad did you feel right when 
he said, “Sorry, I don’t have time now”? 

Patient: About 75%. 

Some patients have difficulty with or don’t like putting a specihc 
number to the intensity. You can simply ask them to rate whether they 
experienced the emotion “a little,” “a medium amount,” “very,” or “com¬ 
pletely.” If even that is difficult, drawing a scale can help: 


Not sad at all A little sad Medium sad Very sad Completely sad 

(saddest I have 
been or could 
imagine being) 



Identifying Emotions 


165 


Therapist: How did you feel when your friend said, “Sorry, I don’t 
have time now”? 

Patient: Sad. 

Therapist: How sad did you feel, 0 to 100%? 

Patient: I’m not sure. I’m not too good with numbers. 

Therapist: Do you think you felt a little sad? A medium amount sad? 
Very sad? Or completely sad? 

PATIENT: What were the choices again? 

Therapist: Here, let me draw a scale. Your sadness—would you say 
{pointing to the scale) that you were a just a little, a medium amount, 
very sad, or completely sad? 

PATIENT: Oh, very sad. 

Therapist: Okay, we’ve got our scale now. Let’s see how useful it is. 
Were you sad any other times this week? 

PATIENT: Yeah, last night when I locked myself out of my room. 

Therapist: Use your new scale as a guide. About how sad did you 
feel? 

PATIENT: Well, between a medium amount and very sad. 

Therapist: Good. Now, do you think you could use this scale as a guide 
whenever you’re trying to hgure out how sad you are? 

PATIENT: Yes, I can do that. 


USING EMOTIONAL INTENSITY TO GUIDE THERAPY 

Patients may not realize which situations they should bring up for dis¬ 
cussion. You can ask them to rate the degree of distress they are still 
experiencing to decide whether discussion of a given situation is likely 
to help. In the next transcript, I quickly realize that Sally and I will 
probably not accomplish much by focusing on an initial situation that 
she has described: 

Therapist: So a problem you want to talk about has to do with your 
roommate? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Did something come up this week? 

Patient: Well, I felt bad when she went out with her boyfriend instead 
of me. 

Therapist: How bad did you feel, 0 to 100%? 


166 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

PATIENT: I don’t know. Maybe 25%? 

Therapist: And now? 

Patient: {Thinks.) Less. 

Therapist: Sounds like this wasn’t a terribly upsetting situation. Was 
there another time this week when you got pretty upset with her? 

In summary, you aim to obtain a clear picture of situations that are 
distressing to patients. You help them clearly differentiate their thoughts 
from their emotions. You empathize with their emotions throughout 
this process and help them evaluate the dysfunctional thinking that has 
influenced their mood. 


Chapter 11 

EVALUATING 
AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 


P atients have hundreds or thousands of thoughts a day, some dys¬ 
functional, some not. You will have time to evaluate only few, at 
most, in a given session. This chapter describes how to: 


• Select key automatic thoughts. 

• Use Socratic questioning to evaluate automatic thoughts. 

• Assess the outcome of the evaluation process. 

• Conceptualize when evaluation is ineffective. 

• Use alternate methods of questioning and responding to 
automatic thoughts. 

• Respond when automatic thoughts are true. 

• Teach patients to evaluate their automatic thoughts. 


SELECTING KEY AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 

You have identified an automatic thought. Patients may have made a 
spontaneous utterance during a session (e.g., “I just don’t think any¬ 
thing can help me”); related an automatic thought, often from the past 
week; or reported an automatic thought they predict will arise in the 
future. Next you need to conceptualize whether this is an important 


167 



168 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


thought on which to focus; that is, is it currently distressing or dysfunc¬ 
tional or likely to recur? If it was an automatic thought from the past 
week, you might ask: 


“In what situation did you have this thought? How much did 
you believe it at the time? How much do you believe it now?” 
“How did it make you feel emotionally? How intense was the 
emotion then? How intense is the emotion now?" 

“What did you do?” 


You will also ask yourself whether the patient is likely to have this kind 
of thought again and be distressed by it. You will vary these questions 
slightly if the patient spontaneously uttered the thought and/or if the 
thought is related to a future situation. You also should find out whether 
additional thoughts were more central or distressing: 


“What else went through your mind [in this situation]? 

Did you have any other thoughts or images?” 
“Which thought/image was most upsetting?” 


In the transcript below, I determine that Sally’s automatic thought was 
important: 

Therapist: [summarizing] So you were in class on Thursday, and you 
didn’t know the answers to questions that your professor threw out 
to the class, and you felt really sad because you thought, “I’ll never 
make it here.” How much did you believe that thought, and how sad 
did you feel? 

PATIENT: I believed it a lot, and I felt really sad. 

Therapist: How much do you believe it now, and how sad do you feel 
now? 

PATIENT: I still think I won’t make it. 

Therapist: And is the thought still distressing? 

Patient: Very. 

This turned out to be an important automatic thought for us to evalu¬ 
ate. In another case, though, Sally and I judged that a different auto¬ 
matic thought was probably not worth discussing. Sally was describing a 




Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


169 


problem she had had in the library, and I asked her a few questions to 
evaluate whether this was an important situation to discuss. 

Therapist: [summarizing] So you were in the library and you couldn’t 
find the book you needed, and you thought, “They are so ineffi¬ 
cient. The system is so bad,” and you felt frustrated. How frustrated 
did you feel? 

Patient: Oh, like 90%. 

Therapist: Are you still that frustrated? 

Patient: No, I got over it. 

Therapist: What did you do when you were frustrated? 

Patient: I went back to my room and worked on my chemistry prob¬ 
lems instead. I ended up borrowing the book from Lisa. I have to 
give it back to her by Monday, though. 

Therapist: So you solved the problem. Do you think the library could 
be a problem in the future? Might you get frustrated and leave, 
but not do something productive? Or not get the book you need 
another way? 

PATIENT: I think I’m all right. I know what to expect. If I hadn’t gotten 
the book from Lisa, I would have gone back to the library later and 
asked for help. 

Therapist: That’s good ... Sounds like you’ve got a plan in case any¬ 
thing else comes up. Should we move on to something else? 

Here I judge that the automatic thought, while upsetting at the 
time, did not warrant further discussion because (1) Sally was no lon¬ 
ger distressed by it, (2) she had acted in a functional way, (3) the situa¬ 
tion was resolved, and (4) she had a good solution if the same problem 
recurred. 

Why do patients bring up problems and automatic thoughts that 
are not important? Most of the time, it is because they are simply not 
socialized enough to treatment. But they can learn the skill of figuring 
out what is most important to talk about. 

Even if a patient reports an important automatic thought, you 
might decide not to focus on it, especially if: 


• You judge that doing so might impair the therapeutic relationship 
(e.g., you perceive that the patient is feeling invalidated). 

• The patient’s level of distress is too high to evaluate his thinking. 

• There's insufficient time in the session to help the patient respond 
effectively to the thought. 





170 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

• You assess that it is more important to work on another element of 
the cognitive model (e.g., you might focus instead on solving the 
problematic situation, teaching the patient emotional regulation 
techniques, discussing more adaptive behavioral responses, or 
addressing the patient's physiological response). 

• You assess that it is more important to elicit and work on a 
dysfunctional belief underlying the automatic thought. 

• You assess that it is more important to discuss a different problem. 


QUESTIONING TO EVALUATE 
AN AUTOMATIC THOUGHT 

Having elicited an automatic thought, determined that it is important 
and distressing, and identihed its accompanying reactions (emotional, 
physiological, and behavioral), you may collaboratively decide with 
the patient to evaluate it. You would rarely directly challenge the automatic 
thought, however, for three reasons. 


1. You usually do not know in advance the degree to which any given 
automatic thought is distorted (e.g., Sally’s thought that no one 
wanted to have dinner with her could have been valid). 

2. A direct challenge can lead patients to feel Invalidated (e.g., Sally 
might think, “[My therapist] Is telling me I'm wrong”). 

3. Challenging a cognition violates a fundamental principal of 
cognitive behavior therapy, that of collaborative empiricism: You 
and the patient together examine the automatic thought, test its 
validity and/or utility, and develop a more adaptive response. 


It is also important to keep in mind that automatic thoughts are rarely 
completely erroneous. Usually, they contain at least a grain of truth 
(which is important that you acknowledge). 

Figure 11.1 contains a list of Socratic questions to help patients 
evaluate their thinking. (Actually, “Socratic” is a misnomer some of the 
time; the Socratic questioning method, derived from the philosopher 
Socrates, involves a dialectical discussion.) Patients need a structured 
method to evaluate their thinking; otherwise, their responses to auto¬ 
matic thoughts can be superhcial and unconvincing and will fail to 
improve their mood or functioning. The evaluation should be even- 
handed. You do not want patients, for example, to ignore evidence that 






Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


171 


supports an automatic thought, devise an alternative explanation that 
is not likely, or adopt an unrealistically positive view of what might hap¬ 
pen. 

It is important to relate to patients that not all of the questions in 
Figure 11.1 are suitable for every automatic thought. Moreover, using all 
of the questions, even if they logically apply, may he too cumbersome 
and time consuming. Patients may not evaluate their thoughts at all if 
they consider the process too burdensome. Usually you will introduce 
just one or a few questions at a time. 

You may use questioning from the very hrst session to evaluate a 
specihc automatic thought. In a subsequent session, you will begin to 
explain the process more explicitly, so patients can learn to evaluate 
their thinking between sessions: 

Therapist: {Summarizes past portion of the session; writes automatic thoughts 
on paper for both to see) So when you met your friend Karen on the 
way to the class, you had the thought, “She doesn’t really care what 
happens to me,” and that thought made you feel sad? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: And how much did you believe that thought at the time? 
PATIENT: Oh, pretty much. About 90%. 

Therapist: And how sad did you feel? 

Patient: Maybe 80%. 

Therapist: Do you remember what we said last week? Sometimes 
automatic thoughts are true, sometimes they turn out not to be 
true, and sometimes they have a grain of truth. Can we look at this 
thought about Karen now, and see how accurate it seems? 

Patient: Okay. 

You can use any set of questions to help patients evaluate their 
thinking, but Figure 11.1 can be helpful as it guides you and the patient 
to: 


• Examine the validity of the automatic thought. 

• Explore the possibility of other interpretations or viewpoints. 

• Decatastrophize the problematic situation. 

• Recognize the impact of believing the automatic thought. 

• Gain distance from the thought. 

• Take steps to solve the problem. 



172 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


1. What is the evidence that supports this idea? 

What is the evidence against this idea? 

2. Is there an alternative explanation or viewpoint? 

3. What is the worst that could happen (if I’m not already thinking the worst)? 

If it happened, how could I cope? 

What is the best that could happen? 

What is the most realistic outcome? 

4. What is the effect of my believing the automatic thought? 

What could be the effect of changing my thinking? 

5. What would I tell [a specific friend or family member] 

if he or she were in the same situation? 

6. What should I do? 

V_ 


FIGURE 11.1. Questioning automatic thoughts. 


Each of the questions is described below. 

The “Evidence” Questions 

Because automatic thoughts usually contain a grain of truth, patients 

usually do have some evidence that supports their accuracy (which you 

will seek first), but they often fail to recognize evidence to the contrary 

(which you will seek second): 

Therapist: What’s the evidence that Karen doesn’t care what happens 
to you? 

PATIENT: Well, when we passed on Locust Walk, she seemed like she 
was real rushed. She just quickly said, “Hi, Sally, see you later,” and 
kept going fast. She hardly even looked at me. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: Well, sometimes she’s pretty busy and doesn’t have much time 
for me. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: (Thinks.) No. I guess not. 

Therapist: Okay, now is there any evidence on the other side, that 
maybe she does care about what happens to you? 




Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


173 


PATIENT: {answering in general terms) Well, she is pretty nice. We’ve been 
friends since school started. 

Therapist: [helping Sally think more specihcally] What kinds of 
things does she do or say that might show she likes you? 

PATIENT: Ummm ... she usually asks if I want to go get something to 
eat with her. Sometimes we stay up pretty late just talking about 
things. 

Therapist: Okay. So, on the one hand, on this occasion yesterday, she 
rushed by you, not saying much. And there have been other times, 
too, when she’s been pretty busy. But on the other hand, she asks 
you to eat with her, and you stay up late talking sometimes. Right? 
Patient: Yeah. 

Here I gently probed to uncover evidence regarding the validity of 
Sally’s thought. Having elicited evidence on both sides, I summarized 
what Sally said. 

The “Alternative Explanation” Questions 

Below, I help Sally devise a reasonable alternative explanation for what has 
happened. 

Therapist: Good. Now, let’s look at the situation again. Could there 
be an alternative explanation for what happened, other than she 
doesn’t care about what happens to you? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: Why else might she have rushed by quickly? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. She might have had a class. She might have been 
late for something. 

The “Decatastrophizing” Questions 

Many patients predict a worst-case scenario. If a patient’s automatic 
thought does not contain a catastrophe, it is often useful to ask the 
patients about their worst fear. In both cases, you should follow up by 
asking patients what they can do if the worst does happen. 

Therapist: Okay. Now, what would be the worst that could happen in 
this situation? 

PATIENT: That she would truly not like me, I guess. That I couldn’t 
count on her for support. 


174 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 
Therapist: How could you cope with that? 

Patient: Well, I wouldn’t be happy about it. I guess I’d have to stop 
counting on her friendship. 

Therapist: [asking leading questions to help her develop a robust 
response] Do you have other friends you could count on? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: So you’d be okay? 

Patient: Yes, I would. 

Patients’ worst fears are often unrealistic. Your objective is to help 
them think of more realistic outcomes, but many patients have diffi¬ 
culty doing so. You might help them extend their thinking by hrst ask¬ 
ing for the best outcome. 

Therapist: Now the worst may be unlikely to happen. What’s the best 
that could happen? 

PATIENT: That she’ll realize she cut me off. That she’ll apologize. 
Therapist: And what’s the most realistic outcome} 

Patient: That she really was busy and we’ll continue to be friends. 

In the previous section, I help Sally see that even if the worst happened, 
she would cope. She also realizes that her worst fears are unlikely to 
come true. 

I Q: What if... patients’ worst fears are that they will die? 

A: You obviously would not ask the “How would you cope? ” question. 
Instead you might ask for the best and most realistic outcomes. 
You may also decide to explore what the worst part of dying would 
be: fears of the process of dying, fears of what they imagine an 
afterlife might be like for them, or fears of what would happen to 
loved ones after the patient’s death. 

The “Impact of the Automatic Thought” Questions 

Below, I help Sally assess the consequences of responding and not responding 
to her distorted thinking. 

Therapist: And what is the effect of your thinking that she doesn’t like 
you? 

PATIENT: It makes me sad. I think it kind of makes me withdraw from 
her. 


Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


175 


Therapist: And what could be the effect of changing your thinking} 
Patient: I’d feel better. 

The “Distancing” Questions 

Patients often benefit from getting some distance from their thoughts 
by imagining what they would tell a close friend or family member in a 
similar situation. 

Therapist: Sally, let’s say your friend Allison had a friend who some¬ 
times was rushed, but seemed caring at other times. If Allison had 
the thought, “My friend doesn’t care about me,” what would you 
tell her? 

PATIENT: I guess I’d tell her not to put too much importance on the 
times she seemed rushed, especially if her friend was nice about it. 
Therapist: Does that apply to you? 

Patient: Yes, I guess it does. 

The “Probiem-Soiving” Questions 

The answer to this question may be cognitive and/or behavioral in 
nature. The cognitive part would entail having patients remember their 
responses to the questions. In Sally’s case, we came up with a behavioral 
plan: 

Therapist: And what do you think you should do about this situation? 
PATIENT: Uh ... I’m not sure what you mean. 

Therapist: Well, have you withdrawn any since this happened yester¬ 
day? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I think so. I didn’t say much when I saw her this morn¬ 
ing. 

Therapist: So this morning you were still acting as if that original 
thought were true. How could you act differently? 

PATIENT: I could talk to her more, be friendlier myself. 

If I were unsure of Sally’s social skills or motivation to carry through 
with this plan of being friendlier to Karen, I might have spent a few min¬ 
utes asking Sally such questions as “When might you see her again?”; 
“Would it be worth it, do you think, to seek her out yourself?”; “What 
could you say to her when you do see her?”; “Anything you think could 
get in the way of your saying that?” (If needed, I might have modeled 
what she could say to Karen, and/or engaged Sally in a role play.) 


176 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


ASSESSING THE OUTCOME 
OF THE EVALUATION PROCESS 

In the last part of this discussion, I assess how much Sally now believes 
the original automatic thought and how she feels emotionally, so I can 
decide what to do next in the session. 

Therapist: Good. Now, how much do you believe this thought: “Karen 
doesn’t really care what happens to me”? 

PATIENT: Not very much. Maybe 20%. 

Therapist: Okay. And how sad do you feel? 

Patient: Not much either. 

Therapist: Good. It sounds like this exercise was useful. Let’s go back 
and see what we did that helped. 

You and the patient will not use all the questions in Figure 11.1 for 
every automatic thought you evaluate. Sometimes none of the questions 
seems useful, and you might take another tack altogether (see pages 
178-186). 


CONCEPTUALIZING WHY THE EVALUATION 
OF AN AUTOMATIC THOUGHT WAS INEFFECTIVE 

If the patient still believes the automatic thought to a signihcant degree 
and does not feel better emotionally, you need to conceptualize why 
this initial attempt at cognitive restructuring has not been sufficiently 
effective. Gommon reasons to consider include the following: 


1 . There are other, more central automatic thoughts and/ 
or images left unidentified or unevaluated. 

2. The evaluation of the automatic thought is implausible, 
superficial, or Inadequate. 

3. The patient has not sufficiently expressed the evidence 
that he or she believes supports the automatic thought. 

4. The automatic thought itself is also a core belief. 

5. The patient understands intellectually that the 
automatic thought is distorted, but does not believe it 
on an emotional level. 



Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


177 


In the first situation, the patient has not verbalized the most central 
automatic thought or image. John, for example, reports the thought, “If 
I try out [for the community basketball team], I probably won’t make 
it.” Evaluating this thought does not significantly affect his dysphoria 
because he has other important (but unrecognized) thoughts: “What 
if they think I’m a lousy player?” “What if I make stupid mistakes?” He 
also has an image of the coach and other players watching him with 
mocking, scornful faces. 

In a second situation, the patient responds to an automatic thought super¬ 
ficially. ]o\m thinks, “I won’t finish all my work. I have too much to do.” 
Instead of carefully evaluating the thought, John merely responds, “No, 
I’ll probably get it done.” This response is insufficient, and his anxiety 
does not decrease. 

In a third situation, the therapist does not thoroughly probe for, and there¬ 
fore the patient does not fully express the evidence that his or her automatic 
thought is true, resulting in an ineffective adaptive response, as seen 
here: 

Therapist: Okay, John, what evidence do you have that your sister 

doesn’t want to bother with you? 

PATIENT: Well, she hardly ever calls me. I always call her. 

Therapist: Okay, anything on the other side? That she does care about 

you, that she does want a good relationship with you? 

Had John’s therapist queried him further, he would have uncov¬ 
ered other evidence that John has to support his automatic thought: 
that his sister spent more time with her girlfriends during vacations 
than with John, that she sounded impatient on the phone when he 
called, and that she had not sent him a birthday card. Having elicited 
this additional data, the therapist could have helped John weigh the 
evidence more effectively and investigated alternative explanations for 
his sister’s behavior. 

In a fourth situation, the patient identifies an automatic thought that is 
also a core belief. John often thinks, “I’m incompetent.” He believes this 
idea so strongly that a single evaluation does not alter his perception or 
the associated affect. His therapist needs to use many techniques over 
time to alter this belief (see Chapter 14). 

In a fifth situation, the patient indicates that he believes an adaptive 
response “intellectually, ” in his mind, hut not “emotionally, ” in his heart, soul, 
or gut. He discounts the adaptive response. In this case, the therapist 
and patient need to explore an unarticulated belief that lies behind the 
automatic thought: 


178 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: How much do you believe that it’s not your fault if you get 
laid off? 

Patient: Well, I can see it intellectually. 

Therapist: But? 

Patient: Even though I know the economy is bad, I still think I should 
be able to hold on to myjob. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s assume for a moment that you do get laid off. 
What would be the worst part about that, or what would that mean? 

Here, John’s therapist discovers that he does not really believe the adap¬ 
tive response and uncovers an assumption: If I lose my job, it means I’m 
incompetent. 

To summarize, having evaluated an automatic thought, you ask 
patients to rate how much they believe the adaptive response and how 
they feel emotionally. If their belief is low and they are still distressed, 
you conceptualize why examining the thought did not alleviate their 
distress and plan a strategy for what to do next. 


USING ALTERNATE METHODS TO HELP PATIENTS 
EXAMINETHEIRTHINKING 

In lieu of or in addition to using the questions in Figure 11.1, you can 
do the following: 


• Vary your questions. 

• Identify the cognitive distortion. 

• Use self-disclosure. 


These strategies are described below. 

Using Alternative Questions 

The following transcript is just one illustration of how to vary your ques¬ 
tions when you predict that standard questions will be ineffective. 

Therapist: What went through your mind [when you asked your mom 
if it was all right with her to shorten your time together, and she 
sounded hurt and angry] ? 

PATIENT: That I should have known it was a bad time to call. I shouldn’t 
have called. 



Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


179 


Therapist: What’s the evidence that you shouldn’t have called? 
Patient: Well, my mother is usually rushed in the morning. If I had 
waited until after she got home from work, she might have heen in 
a better frame of mind. 

Therapist: Had that occurred to you? 

Patient: Well, yeah, hut I wanted to let my friend know right away 
whether I could visit, so she could make plans. 

Therapist: So you actually had a reason for calling when you did, and 
it sounds as if you knew it might he risky, hut you really wanted to 
let your friend know as soon as you could? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Is it reasonable to be so hard on yourself for taking the 
risk? 

Patient: No ... 

Therapist: You don’t sound convinced. How bad is it anyway, in the 
scheme of things, for your mom to feel hurt that you want to spend 
one week of your summer vacation with your friend? 

I followed up these questions with others: How hurt did your mother 
feel? How long did the hurt last at that level? How does she probably 
feel now? Is it possible for you to spare your mother hurt all the time? 
Can you possibly do what is good for you and not hurt your mother at 
all, given that she wants to spend as much time with you as she can? Is it 
desirable to have a goal of nraer hurting someone else’s feelings? What 
would you have to give up yourself? 

The previous transcript demonstrates how to use nonstandard ques¬ 
tions to help patients adopt a more functional perspective. Although I 
started out questioning the validity of the thought, I shifted the empha¬ 
sis to the implicit underlying belief (which we had previously discussed in 
other contexts): “It’s bad to hurt other people’s feelings.” At the end, I 
asked the patient an open-ended question (“How do you see the situa¬ 
tion now?”) to see whether she needed more help in responding to her 
thoughts. Note that many questions I asked were a variation of Ques¬ 
tion 2 in Figure 11.1: “Is there an alternative explanation [for why you 
called when you did and for why your mother was hurt, other than that 
you were bad and at fault] ?” 

Identifying Cognitive Distortions 

Patients tend to make consistent errors in their thinking. Often there 
is a systematic negative bias in the cognitive processing of patients who 
suffer from a psychiatric disorder (Beck, 1976). The most common 


180 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


errors are presented in Figure 11.2 (see also Burns, 1980). It often helps 
to label distortions and to teach patients to do the same. You might 
make mental notes of a patient’s common distortions and point out a 
specihc distortion when you spot a pattern: 

Therapist: Sally, this idea that you either get an “A” and you’re a suc¬ 
cess, or you don’t and you’re a failure—that’s what we call all-or- 
nothing thinking. Does it seem familiar? 1 remember you also 
thought that either you understood everything in a chapter, or you 
were stupid. Do you think it could be helpful to watch out for this 
kind of thinking? 

You can also provide patients with a list of distortions, such as the 
one in Figure 11.2, if you judge that they will not be overwhelmed by it. 
At another session, 1 gave Sally the list, and together we identihed her 
typical automatic thoughts and the distortions they represented. For 
example: 

Catastrophizing: “I’ll flunk out of school.” 

All-or-nothing thinking: “If 1 can’t read the entire chapter, it’s not 
worth reading any of it.” 

Mind reading: “My roommate doesn’t want to be bothered with 
me. 

Emotional reasoning: “1 feel so incompetent.” 

Sally kept this list handy and often referred to it when she was evalu¬ 
ating her automatic thoughts. Doing so helped her gain additional dis¬ 
tance from her thinking and allowed her to believe more strongly that 
perhaps an automatic thought was not true, or not completely true. 

Using Self-Disclosure 

At times, you might use judicious self-disclosure instead of or in addi¬ 
tion to Socratic questioning or other methods, to demonstrate how you 
were able to change similar automatic thoughts that you had, as illus¬ 
trated below: 

Therapist: You know, Sally, sometimes I have thoughts like yours: “I 
have to make everyone happy.” But then I remind myself that I have 
a responsibility to take care of myself, and that the world probably 
won’t end if someone is disappointed, {pause) Do you think that 
applies to you, too? 


Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


181 


f ^ 

Although some automatic thoughts are true, many are either untrue or have 

just a grain of truth. Typical mistakes in thinking include; 

1. All or-nothing thinking (also called black-and-white, polarized, or 
dichotomous thinking): You view a situation in only two categories instead 
of on a continuum. 

Example'. “If I'm not a total success. I’m a failure.” 

2. Catastrophizing (also called fortune-telling): You predict the future 
negatively without considering other, more likely outcomes. 

Example'. “I'll be so upset, I won't be able to function at all." 

3. Disqualifying or discounting the positive: You unreasonably tell 
yourself that positive experiences, deeds, or qualities do not count. 

Example'. “I did that project well, but that doesn’t mean I’m competent; I 
just got lucky." 

4. Emotional reasoning: You think something must be true because you 
“feel" (actually believe) it so strongly, ignoring or discounting evidence to 
the contrary. 

Example'. “I know I do a lot of things okay at work, but I still feel like I’m a 
failure.” 

5. Labeling: You put a fixed, global label on yourself or others without 
considering that the evidence might more reasonably lead to a less 
disastrous conclusion. 

Example'. “I’m a loser. He’s no good.” 

6. Magnification/minimization: When you evaluate yourself, another 
person, or a situation, you unreasonably magnify the negative and/or 
minimize the positive. 

Example'. “Getting a mediocre evaluation proves how inadequate I am. 
Getting high marks doesn’t mean I'm smart.” 

7. Mental filter (also called selective abstraction); You pay undue attention 
to one negative detail instead of seeing the whole picture. 

Example'. “Because I got one low rating on my evaluation [which also 
contained several high ratings] it means I’m doing a lousy job.” 

8. Mind reading: You believe you know what others are thinking, failing to 
consider other, more likely possibilities. 

Example'. “He thinks that I don’t know the first thing about this project.” 

(cont) 

v_y 


FIGURE 11.2. Thinking errors. Adapted with permission from Aaron T. Beck. 



182 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


r ^ 

9. Overgeneralization: You make a sweeping negative conciusion that goes 
far beyond the current situation. 

Example'. “[Because i teit uncomfortabie at the meeting] I don't have what 
it takes to make friends.” 

10. Personalization: You believe others are behaving negatively because of 
you, without considering more plausible explanations tor their behavior. 
Example'. “The repairman was curt to me because I did something wrong.” 

11. “Should” and “must” statements (also called imperatives); You have 
a precise, fixed idea of how you or others should behave, and you 
overestimate how bad it is that these expectations are not met. 

Example'. “It's terrible that I made a mistake. I should always do my best.” 

12. Tunnel vision: You only see the negative aspects of a situation. 

Example'. “My son’s teacher can’t do anything right. He’s critical and 
insensitive and lousy at teaching.” 

V___ 


FIGURE 11.2. (cont.) 

WHEN AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS ARE TRUE 

Sometimes automatic thoughts turn out to be true, and you may choose 
to do one or more of the following: 


Focus on problem solving. 

Investigate whether the patient has drawn 
an invalid or dysfunctional conclusion. 
Work on acceptance. 


These strategies are described below. 

Focus on Problem Solving 

Not all problems can be solved, but if a patient’s perception of a situa¬ 
tion appears to be valid, you might investigate whether the problem can 
be solved, at least to some degree. In the transcript below, Sally and I 
have evaluated her automatic thought, “I’m going to run out of money,” 
and the evidence seems clear that this is a valid perception. 




Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


183 


Therapist: So even if you’re careful, it looks as if you won’t be able to 
come up with rent toward the end of the school year ... Have you 
already tried to do something about this? 

PATIENT: No, not really. I don’t want to ask my parents for more. They’re 
pretty strapped as it is. 

Therapist: But you might be able to use them as a last resort? 

Patient: Maybe ... 

Therapist: Have you thought of anything else? 

Patient: No, I don’t think there’s anything else I can do. 

Therapist: Have you talked to the dean of students? 

Patient: I hadn’t thought of that. 

Therapist: Quite possibly he could help. I imagine there are other stu¬ 
dents who are also struggling financially. He might suggest another 
student loan, or a payment plan, or maybe there’s some emergency 
fund you could tap into. 

Patient: I hope so. 

Therapist: Well, do you want to start with the dean? If that doesn’t 
work out, we can brainstorm other ideas: getting a job, moving 
in with someone else, borrowing from another relative ... There 
might be lots of things that you could do that you haven’t thought 
of because you’ve been so depressed. 

Investigate Invalid Conclusions 

While an automatic thought might be true, the meaning may be invalid 

or at least not completely valid (as illustrated below), and you can exam¬ 
ine the underlying belief or conclusion. 

Therapist: So it looks as if you really did hurt your friend’s feelings. 

PATIENT: Yeah, I feel so bad about it. 

Therapist: What does it mean about you that you hurt her feelings? 
Or what are you afraid will happen? 

PATIENT: I should never have said that to her. I’m a terrible friend ... 
I’m a terrible person! She’ll never want to talk to me again! 

Therapist: Okay, can we look at that first? What other evidence do you 
have that you’re a terrible person? ... Is there evidence on the other 
side, that maybe you’re not? 


184 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Work toward Acceptance 

Some problems cannot be solved and may never be solved, and patients 
need help in accepting that outcome. They may continue to feel miser¬ 
able if they have unrealistic expectations or hopes that an unresolvable 
problem will somehow, almost magically, improve. Meanwhile, they 
need assistance in learning to focus on their core values, emphasize the 
more rewarding parts of their lives, and enrich their experience in new 
ways. A number of strategies designed to enhance acceptance can be 
found in Hayes and colleagues (2004). 


TEACHING PATIENTS 
TO EVALUATE THEIR THINKING 

At some point, you may give a copy of the questions in Figure 11.1 to the 
patient. You could do so immediately following the part of a session in 
which you have verbally asked these questions. Or you would wait until 
a later time if your questioning was not very effective, if you don’t have 
enough time to review Figure 11.1 with the patient, or if you think the 
patient would be overwhelmed. Many patients do better if you teach 
them just one or two questions, writing them on a separate piece of 
paper. You can give the full list to other patients and just mark the ques¬ 
tions as you review them. 

Learning to evaluate automatic thoughts is a skill. Some patients 
grasp it right away; others need much repeated, guided practice in 
a graded fashion. For example, one patient might be helped with a 
variation of the “evidence” question: “How do 1 know this thought is 
true?” Another patient who often catastrophizes might do better with 
a variation of the “decatastrophizing” question: “If the worst happens, 
how would 1 cope? What are the best and most realistic outcomes?” 
Still another patient might find it most useful to answer the “distanc¬ 
ing” question: “If [my sister-in-law] were in this situation and had this 
thought, what would 1 tell her?” 

When patients seem ready to learn this skill, select an automatic 
thought for which most of the questions in Figure 11.1 are likely to 
apply. Following an examination of one of Sally’s automatic thoughts, 1 
point out the process to her: 

Therapist: If you’re like most people, you may find that using these 
questions at home is sometimes harder than it looks. In fact, there 
will be lots of times when we really need to work together to help 
you examine a thought. But give it a try, and if you have trouble we 
can talk about it next week. Okay? 


Evaluating Automatic Thoughts 


185 


Predicting that patients may have some difficulty can help allay 
self-criticism or defeatism if the assignment doesn’t go smoothly. Had 
I suspected, despite my admonition, that Sally would judge herself 
harshly for not being ahle to fulhll the homework assignment perfectly, 
I would have pursued the subject more thoroughly: 

Therapist: Sally, if you do have trouble evaluating your thoughts this 
week, how are you likely to feel? 

PATIENT: Frustrated, I guess. 

Therapist: What’s likely to go through your mind? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. I’ll probably just quit. 

Therapist: Can you imagine looking at the sheet of paper and not 
being able to hgure out what to do? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: What’s going through your mind as you look at the 
paper? 

PATIENT: “I should be able to do this. I’m so stupid.” 

Therapist: Good! Do you think it would help to have a written 
reminder that it’s just a skill you’ll get better at as you learn more 
and more here with me? 

PATIENT: Yes. {Writes it in her therapy notes.) 

Therapist: Do you think this response will help enough? Or do you 
think we should put off this assignment until we have more time to 
practice together? 

PATIENT: No. I think I can try it. 

Therapist: Okay, now if you do get frustrated and have automatic 
thoughts, be sure to jot them down. Okay? 

Here I make the assignment into a no-lose proposition: Either Sally 
does it successfully, or she has some difficulty that I can help her with at 
the next session. If frustrated, she either reads her therapy notes (and 
probably feels better), or keeps track of her thoughts so she can learn to 
respond to them in the next session. 


TAKING A SHORTCUT: 

NOT USING THE OUESTIONS AT ALL 


Finally, when patients have progressed in therapy and can automati¬ 
cally evaluate their thoughts, you may sometimes just ask them to devise 
an adaptive response. 


186 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: [When I get ready to ask my roommate to keep the kitchen 
neater] I’ll probably think I should just clean it better myself. 
Therapist: Can you think of a more helpful way to view this? 

PATIENT: Yeah. That it’s better for me to stand up for myself. That Tm 
doing something reasonable. I’m not being mean or asking her to 
do more than her share. That she’ll probably take it okay, like she 
did the last time I asked her to clean up. 

Therapist: Good. What do you think will happen to your anxiety if 
you say that to yourself? 

PATIENT: It’ll go down. 

Here’s another example: 

Therapist: Anything you can think of that might get in the way of your 
starting the chemistry assignment? 

PATIENT: I might think there’s too much to do and get overwhelmed. 

Therapist: Okay, if you do have the thought, “There’s too much to 
do,” what can you tell yourself? 

PATIENT: That I don’t have to do it all in one night, that I don’t have to 
understand it perfectly this hrst time through. 

Therapist: Good. Will that be enough, do you think, to go ahead and 
start the assignment? 

Evaluating automatic thoughts is a specihc skill, one at which both 
therapists and patients improve with repeated practice. The next chapter 
describes how to help patients respond to their automatic thoughts. 


Chapter 12 

^30 


RESPONDING TO 
AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 


T he previous chapter demonstrated how to help patients evaluate 
important automatic thoughts and determine the effectiveness 
of their evaluation in session. This chapter describes how to facilitate 
patients’ evaluation of and response to automatic thoughts between ses¬ 
sions. Patients experience two kinds of automatic thoughts outside of 
session: ones they have already identified and evaluated in session, and 
novel cognitions. For the former group, you will ensure that patients 
have recorded robust responses in writing (on paper or an index card, 
in a therapy notebook, or on a smartphone) or in an audio format (on 
an audiotape or CD, in a recorded message on their phone, etc.). 

To respond to novel automatic thoughts between sessions, you will 
teach patients to use the list of questions in Figure 11.1 (either mentally 
or in writing), or to use a worksheet such as the Thought Record in Fig¬ 
ure 12.1 or an easier version, the “Testing Your Thoughts” Worksheet in 
Figure 12.2. But there are other ways to respond to automatic thoughts. 
Patients can engage in problem solving, use distraction or relaxation 
techniques, or label and accept their thoughts and emotions without 
evaluation. 


187 


188 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

REVIEWING THERAPY NOTES 

Having evaluated an automatic thought with patients (usually through 
Socratic questioning), you will ask them to summarize. For example, 
you might pose one of the following questions: 


“Can you summarize what we’ve just been talking about?” 
“What do you think would be important for you to remember 
this week?” 

“If the situation comes up again, what do you wish you 
could tell yourself?” 


When patients express a cogent summary, you can ask them if they 
would like to record it, so they can better rememher the response when 
similar automatic thoughts arise in the future. In the following tran¬ 
script, Sally and I have just evaluated her thought “I can’t do it,” using 
many of the questions in Figure 11.1 (page 172). I ask her to summa¬ 
rize. 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, so if you open your chemistry text this week 
and again have the thought “I can’t do it,” what do you want to 
remind yourself? 

PATIENT: That it’s prohahly not true. That I can prohahly do at least 
some of it, because I have in the past, and I can get help if I don’t 
understand all of it. I guess doing part of the reading is better than 
not doing any at all. 

Therapist: That’s good. Should we record that? 

Q: What if ... patients’ responses are superficial, confused, or too 
wordy? 

A: You might say, “Well, I think that’s close, but I wonder if it would 
be more helpful to remember it this way ...” If their answers are 
reasonable but incomplete, you might ask, “Do you also want to 
remind yourself that...?” If they agree, you or they can record 
your suggestions. 

It is desirable to have patients read their therapy notes each morn¬ 
ing and pull them out, as needed, during the day. Patients tend to inte¬ 
grate responses into their thinking when they have rehearsed them 
repeatedly. Reading notes only when encountering difficult situations 





Responding to Automatic Thoughts 


189 


is usually less effective than reading them regularly in preparation for A\i- 
hcult situations. Below are some of Sally’s therapy notes. They contain: 


• Responses to dysfunctional thinking, 

• Behavioral assignments, or 

• A combination of responses and 
behavioral assignments. 



When 1 think “I’ll never get all my work done,” remind myself: 

1 just need to focus on what 1 need to do right now. 

1 don’t have to do everything perfectly. 

1 can ask for help. It’s not a sign of weakness. 










When 1 think “I’d rather stay in bed,” tell myself that 1 always 

feel a little better when 1 get something done and worse when 

1 do nothing. 

































190 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 



It might feel as if no one cares about me, but that’s not true. 

My family, Allison, and Joe do. It’s harder to feel their caring. 

but that’s because I’m depressed. The best thing to do is to stay 

in touch with them, so go call or text them. 










When 1 want to ask the professor for help 

1. Remind myself it’s no big deal. The worst that’ll happen is he’ll act gruff 

2. Remember, this is an experiment. Even if it doesn’t work this time. 

it’s good practice for me. 

3. If he is gruff it probably has nothing to do with me. He may be busy or 

irritated by something else. 

4. Even if he won’t help me, so what? It’s his failure as a professor, not mine 

as a student. It means he isn’t doing his job properly. 1 can ask 

the department for a tutor, or ask someone else in the class to help. 

5. So 1 should go knock on his door. At worst, it’ll be good practice. 


























Responding to Automatic Thoughts 


191 



Strategies for when I’m anxious 

1. Vo a Thought Record. 

2. Read coping cards. 

3. Call [friend]. 

4. Go for a walk or run. 

5. Tolerate the anxiety. It’s an unpleasant feeling but it’s not iife 

threatening, and it will decrease once 1 turn my attention to 

something else. 





On a practical note, you should keep copies of your patients’ therapy 
notes, photocopying them or using carbonless paper. You will probably 
hnd that you refer back to these therapy notes often, especially when 
reviewing patients’ homework or reinforcing ideas you had discussed 
with patients in prior sessions. Also, a certain number of patients lose 
their notes and beneht greatly from a photocopy of your copy. 

Audio-Recorded Therapy Notes 

Ensuring that patients have written therapy notes is ideal. They can 
carry around a notebook or index cards to read as needed, or they 
can read their therapy notes on their smartphone. But some patients 
cannot or do not like to read. Or they hnd listening to notes to be 
more effective. In any case, you can turn on an audio recorder or have 
patients push the record button on their phone when you and they 
develop responses to automatic thoughts; or you can note what the 
responses are and turn on the recorder for the last few minutes of a 
session, recording all responses at once. Recording and then having 
patients listen to an entire therapy session is usually not as useful. They 
are likely to listen to the recording only once during the week, instead 
of repeatedly listening to the most important points of the session. 

Motivating patients to read therapy notes is similar to facilitating 
their doing any kind of homework (see Chapter 17). Initially, it is use¬ 
ful to have patients read their therapy notes at the end of a session and 
have them note that it takes less than a minute. When patients cannot 
read therapy notes, they may be able to listen to an audiotaped sum¬ 
mary or hnd someone in their environment who can read the notes to 
them. 














192 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

EVALUATING AND RESPONDING TO NOVEL 
AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS BETWEEN SESSIONS 

The previous chapter provided a list of Socratic questions patients can 
ask themselves to evaluate their thinking. Before suggesting that they 
use these questions at home when they feel upset, you will make sure 
that: 


• They understand that evaluating their thinking can 
help them feel better. 

• They believe they will be able to use the questions 
effectively at home. 

• They understand that not all questions apply to all 
automatic thoughts. 

• You have shortened the list for patients who find 
the entire list daunting or overwhelming. 


You also guide them as to when and how to use the questions, as I did 

with Sally: 

Therapist: Sally, it would he too burdensome for you to use these 
questions for every automatic thought you have this week. That’s 
one reason that you have therapy notes to read every morning and 
as needed during the day. But when you notice your mood getting 
worse and you catch your automatic thoughts, think to yourself, 
“Do I have therapy notes that cover this?” Okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: If you do, you have a choice. Use these questions or pull 
out your notes. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: If you don’t have notes, then you dehnitely will want to pull 
out the list at least some of the time. Now, ideally, you’d not only 
ask yourself the questions, hut you’d also write down your answers, 
if you can. How does that sound? 

Patient: Fine. 

Thought Records 

The Thought Record (TR), also known in an earlier version as the 

Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts (Beck et al., 1979), is a work- 



Responding to Automatic Thoughts 


193 


sheet that prompts patients to evaluate their automatic thoughts when 
they feel distressed (see Figure 12.1). It elicits more information than 
just responding to the questions in Figure 11.1. It is not necessary for 
patients to use the TR if these questions are helpful, but many patients 
hnd the worksheet organizes their thinking and responses better. (The 
TR is not particularly useful, however, for patients who are low func¬ 
tioning, dislike writing, are unmotivated, or not well enough equipped 
intellectually to beneht from it.) You might hrst use the list of questions 
in Figure 11.1 (page 172) with patients, then show them how to write 
the answers and other information on a Thought Record. 

In the following section, Sally and 1 have used the list of Socratic 
questions to evaluate her thought “Bob won’t want to go with me,” and 
she feels better. 

Therapist: Good. Now Td like to show you a worksheet that 1 think 
will help you at home, if that’s okay. It’s called a Thought Record— 
and it’s just an organized way of writing down what we just did. 
Okay? {Pulls out Figure 12.1.) 

Patient: Sure. 

Therapist: Here it is. Now, before 1 start, 1 have to tell you a couple 
of things. First, spelling, handwriting, and grammar don’t count. 
Second, this is a useful tool, and it may take some practice for you 
to get really good at it. So expect to make some mistakes along the 
way. These mistakes will actually be useful—^we’ll see what was con¬ 
fusing, so you can do it better the next time. Okay? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Here’s how you’ll know when you should pull it out {point¬ 
ing to the top of the sheet). Do you see here at the top? It says, “Direc¬ 
tions: When you notice your mood getting worse, ask yourself, 
‘What’s going through my mind right now? ’ and as soon as possible 
jot down the thought or mental image in the Automatic Thought 
column.” 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Now, let’s look at the columns. The directions are at the top 
of each. The hrst column is easy. When did you have that thought 
about Bob? 

PATIENT: Friday afternoon, after class. 

Therapist: Okay. You can write that in the hrst column. 

Patient: {Does so.) 

Therapist: Now, you’ll see the second column prompts you to write 
down the situation. So you could put, “Thinking about asking Bob 


194 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

if he wants to have coffee.” (Pawses while Sally writes.) Now, the third 
column is for your automatic thoughts and how much you believe 
them. Here’s where you write down the actual words or pictures 
that went through your mind. In this case, you had the thought, 
“He won’t want to go with me.” How much did you believe the 
thought at that time? 

PATIENT: A lot, maybe 90%. 

Therapist: Good. You could write “90%” next to your thought, or “a 
lot.” And in the fourth column, you write your emotion and how 
intense it was. In this case, how sad did you feel? 

Patient: Pretty sad—75%. 

Therapist: Okay, write that down. {Waits for Sally to finish writing.) 
Next, look at the fifth column. It tells you to identify the cognitive 
distortion. Can you look at your list and tell me if you think your 
automatic thought falls into one of those categories? 

PATIENT: I think it’s fortune telling or mind reading. 

Therapist: Good. Actually, it’s both. Next, column five tells you to use 
the questions at the bottom. Do you want to write down the answers 
we just went over? 

PATIENT: Okay. {Does so.) 

Therapist: Now, the last column tells us how helpful this was. How 
much do you now believe the automatic thought? 

Patient: Less. Maybe 50%. 

Therapist: And how sad are you feeling? 

Patient: Less. About 50%, I guess. 

Therapist: So you can write that down. 

Patient: {Does so.) 

Therapist: I want you to remember what I told you before. Don’t 
expect all your negative emotion to go away. But if doing a Thought 
Record helps a little, even 10%, it was worth doing. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: So what do you think of the Thought Record? Do you want 
to try it this week at home? 

Patient: Yes, I will. 

For some patients, it is better to introduce the Thought Record in 

two stages. In one session, you might teach patients to fill in the first 

four columns. If they successfully do so for homework, you can then 

teach them to use the final two columns. 


; Directions; When you notice your mood getting worse, ask yourself, “What’s going through my mind right now?” and as soon as possible 
jot down the thought or mental image in the Automatic Thought(s) column. 


C 

O 

a 

(A 

0 ) 

VL 

0 ) 

a. 

"O 

< 


(Q £ 
£ §> 
2 o 

< H 


(0 


<D ^ 
« .£ 
Q H 


-C ^ ? 

o cc ^ w 

-Q QJ ^ O ^ 

3 .9i o E ° § c^. -5 D 
E-S-^-T 


o 

-a 

3 

O 

— 5:-. 
• ^ "O 


■i ^ 

^ .E £ S 


O I! 
>. fO 


o 03 05 


It; 0-^1= 


E P 



3 

0 

E 

<Vi 


^ -E 

TS P 


O' 



p 

CCS 

C P 


03 

03 

5 

(Vi 

■Vi 

^ CSV 


CO 

CO 

0 

E 

E 

X S_ 

o- 

3 

c 

I 

3 

p 

H- 0 

03 

js: 


0 

0 . 


P 

E 

"e 

CSV ^ 

CC3 

E 

c\j 

CO 

03 


0 

0 

“CS 

if 


E 2 

n3 -o 


ra d o) CM I 


o .p 

r~i H-> 

O 

E 


cn 




CP X 

g ^ E o 

03 ^ O 

03 o F 
CO o 

^ O 

5 ^ 0=1 

T-: ~0 

c 

CO 


I i 


o +- 

CO 


O -O 
CO ^ 


>, ^ 
p 


w W .2 


o 

^ - 
^ oj to 


O 

o:) 


T3 o 

c 

O CC3 

s: 

^ o 

‘ 'S3 


o O 
(S> 


tD 


§ ^ 


£l_ O 
■ 0^ 
, CCS — 

^ = i-^ 

: +:» CCS -p 

'"kg 

-T^ 


I \VJ — 

■ Jli o 


cr ^ 
b 't 
o ^ 
E 

cT) <ii 
(Vi - 

■ >> — 
CCS <0 
\D 

= ^ 

-Vi 

.2 ^ 

■g 

Cl 


’ CSV 


P 

o 

<33 

O 

P 

P 

E 

p O 
'E O 

CSV W 

<0 _; 

o ^ 

^ 'e ^ 

^ 3 CSV 


CSV 

ih CCS 


CSV (:cs 

P 


Vi) (O g 

= -E3> E 

< (Vi -Vi 'csv 


p k O 

0 0 5 

CCS £i__ 

= <0 . 

73 o O 

E 


o ^ 

VO 5^ 
'^lO 

1e c^- 


CV_ CCS 

3 o 

o ^ 

CSV 53 

p p 

CSV (i3 

3 _E 

p 




p ^ 

p ^2 

is 

"J 

o E 

<vi .-e 

X ^ 


CSV ^ 

^ P 


^ o 


E -Ci 
Ie o 
\- ££i 


"o 

o 

CCS 


s 

?5 

>1 


^ O 

2 £ 

0) Q) ,E 2 

£ \ 

i2 M ;e -i 

^ £ 

c^- I £ £ 

P C .E ^ 


03 

03 

3 

Q. 

Q. 

(C3 

C 

(C 

0 

5 


0 

15 

-0 

>v 


3 

£ 


0 

4 — 


U 

0 

4 —> 

15 

-t—' 

0 

03 


03 

0 

I 0 

M— 

03 

0 

4 —> 


£ CD 03 CO 

Tt -Q -C 


-H- Q) ; 

1;^ Q- • 

2 ° c 

2 o ^ 

^ H 
o ^ 
c 

03 


^ ZZ 

-Q ^ 
^ -c 
^ "O 
o c 
o (C 
c 
o 


3 

.E 8 


o £ 


CO c 

H 

9r 

S' 

cC 


O 03 

£ E 
(0 (0 


03 I— 


^ O Q) 


O 

O. ■ 


>v 

£ 


03 O 

> 5 

15 03 
£ 2 
-3 

CC3 15 

® I 

03 ^ 
CO CO 

o ^ 

Q. C^- 

i| 

15 

Q. C 

^ Q. 

o X 

P 03 
CO p 


03 = 

OJ 


> o 

> ^ 
--V CO 

S o 

T3 
*03 — 

£ IE 


3 

O ^ 
O 1c 


CO F CO 


03 

3 _ 

O CC3 


5 

CC ^ 
03 m 


195 


FIGURE 12.1. Thought Record. From Cognitive behavior therapy worksheet packet. Copyright 2011 by Judith S. Beck. Bala Cynwyd, PA: Beck 
Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. 
















196 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

“Testing Your Thoughts” Worksheet 

When you predict that the Thought Record could be too confusing or 
elaborate for patients, you can consider using a simplified version, the 
“Testing Your Thoughts” Worksheet (Figure 12.2). It contains similar 
questions, is worded at a lower readability level, and its more structured 
format is easier to complete. 


f N 

What is the situation? Joanne yelied at me. 


What am I thinking or imagining? She’li never cail me again. 


What makes me think the thought is true? She seemed pretty mad._ 

What makes me think the thought is not true or not compieteiy true? She’s 
gotten mad at me before, but she seems to get over it. 

What’s another way to iook at this? She’s got a reai temper, but she doesn’t 
stay mad. 

What’s the worst that couid happen? What couid I do then? I’d lose my best 
friend. I would have to concentrate on my other friends. 

What's the best that could happen? She’ll call back right away and apologize. 

What will probably happen? She’ll act kind of cold for a few days, but then I’ll 
call her. 

What will happen it I keep telling myself the same thought? I’ll keep being 
really upset. 

What could happen if I changed my thinking? I could feel better, maybe cail her 
sooner. 

What would I tell my friend [think of a specific person] Emily if this 

happened to him or her? Don’t worry, just wait 2 days and call. 

k J 


FIGURE 12.2. “Testing Your Thoughts” Worksheet. From Cognitive behavior therapy 
worksheet packet. Copyright 2011 by Judith S. Beck. Bala Cynwyd, PA: Beck Institute 
for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. 

























Responding to Automatic Thoughts 


197 


When a Worksheet Is Not Sufficiently Helpful 

As with any technique in cognitive behavior therapy, it is important not 
to overemphasize the importance of worksheets. Most patients, at some 
point, hnd that completing a particular worksheet did not provide much 
relief. If you emphasize its general usefulness and “stuck points” as an 
opportunity for learning, you help patients avoid automatic thoughts 
critical of themselves, the therapy, the worksheet, or you. 

As described in the previous chapter, evaluation of an automatic 
thought (with or without a worksheet) may be less than optimal if 
patients fail to respond to their most upsetting thought or image, if 
their automatic thought is a core belief or activated an underlying 
belief, if their evaluation and response are superhcial, or if they dis¬ 
count their response. 


RESPONDING TO AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 
IN OTHER WAYS 

Sometimes you will use other methods to respond to automatic thoughts. 
For example, when patients have anxious, obsessive thoughts, you may 
teach them the “AWARE” technique (Beck & Emery, 1985) in which 
patients practice: 


A: Accepting their anxiety. 

W: Watching their anxiety without judgment. 

A: Acting with their anxiety, as if they aren't anxious. 
R: Repeating the first three steps. 

E: Expecting the best. 


When patients’ emotions are too high to effectively use their execu¬ 
tive function to evaluate their thoughts, you might use distraction or 
relaxation techniques, described in Chapter 15. 



Chapter 13 

^30 


IDENTIFYING AND MODIFYING 
INTERMEDIATE BELIEFS 


P revious chapters described the identihcation and modihcation of 
automatic thoughts, the actual words or images that go through 
a patient’s mind in a given situation and lead to distress. This chapter 
and the next describe the deeper, often unarticulated ideas or under¬ 
standings that patients have about themselves, others, and their per¬ 
sonal worlds, that give rise to specihc automatic thoughts. These ideas 
often are not expressed before therapy but can easily be elicited from 
the patient, or inferred and then tested. 

As described in Chapter 3, these beliefs may be classihed in two 
categories: intermediate beliefs (composed of rules, attitudes, and 
assumptions) and core beliefs (rigid, global ideas about oneself, others, 
or the world). Intermediate beliefs, while not as easily modihable as 
automatic thoughts, are still more malleable than core beliefs. 

This chapter is divided into two parts. In the hrst part, cognitive 
conceptualization (initially introduced in Chapter 3) is described, and 
the process of developing a Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram is 
illustrated. Conceptualization is emphasized throughout this volume to 
help the therapist plan therapy, become adept at choosing appropriate 
interventions, and overcome stuck points when standard interventions 
fail. Eliciting and modifying intermediate beliefs are the focus of the second 
part of this chapter. These techniques also apply to the next chapter, 
which presents additional specialized techniques for eliciting and mod¬ 
ifying core beliefs. 


198 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


199 


COGNITIVE CONCEPTUALIZATION 

Generally, you will guide patients to work on automatic thoughts before 
directly modifying their heliefs. From the beginning, though, you start 
formulating a conceptualization, which logically connects automatic 
thoughts to the deeper-level beliefs. If you fail to see this larger picture, 
you will be less likely to direct therapy in an effective, efficient way. 

You can start Riling out a Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram 
(Figures 13.1 and 13.2) after the first session with a patient, if you have 
collected data in the form of the cognitive model (the bottom part of 
the diagram); that is, you have data about the patient’s typical automatic 
thoughts, emotions, behavior, and/or beliefs. This diagram depicts, 
among other things, the relationship between core beliefs, intermedi¬ 
ate beliefs, and current automatic thoughts. It provides a cognitive map 
of the patient’s psychopathology and helps organize the multitude of 
data that the patient presents. The diagram in Figure 13.1 illustrates 
the basic questions you will ask yourself to complete the diagram. 

When filling in data after the initial session, you should regard 
your first efforts as tentative; you have not yet collected enough data 
to determine the extent to which the automatic thoughts patients have 
expressed are very typical for them. The completed diagram will mis¬ 
lead you if you choose situations in which the themes of patients’ auto¬ 
matic thoughts are not part of an overall pattern. After three or four 
sessions, you should be able to complete the bottom half with more 
confidence, as patterns should have emerged. 

You share your partial conceptualization with patients verbally 
(and sometimes on a blank piece of paper) at every session as you sum¬ 
marize their experience in the form of the cognitive model. Generally 
you will not share the worksheet, however, as many patients would find 
it confusing (or occasionally demeaning if they interpret the diagram 
as your attempt to “fit” them into boxes). 

Initially, you may have data to complete only a portion of the dia¬ 
gram. You either leave the other boxes blank, or fill in items you have 
inferred with a question mark to indicate their tentative status. You 
will check out missing or inferred items with the patient at future ses¬ 
sions. At some point you will share both the top and bottom parts of 
the conceptualization, when your goal for a session is to help patients 
understand the broader picture of their difficulties. At that time, you 
will review the conceptualization verbally, share a simplified version 
on a blank sheet of paper, or (for patients whom you judge will ben¬ 
efit) present a blank conceptualization diagram and fill it out together. 
Whenever you present your interpretations, you will do so tentatively 
and label them as hypotheses, asking patients whether they “ring true.” 
Correct hypotheses generally resonate with the patient. 


Patient’s name: ____ Date: 

Diagnosis: Axis I Axis II 



FIGURE 13.1. Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram. Adapted from Cognitive behavior 
therapy worksheet packet. Copyright 2011 byjudith S. Beck. Bala Cynwyd, PA: Beck Institute 
for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. 


Reprinted by permission in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, Second Edition, byjudith 
S. Beck (Guilford Press, 2011). Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of 
this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers may download a larger 
version of this material from www.guilfoid.com/p/beckd. 


200 






























































Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


201 


Usually it is best to start with the bottom half of the conceptu¬ 
alization diagram. You jot down three typical situations in which the 
patient became upset. Then, for each situation, fill in the key automatic 
thought, its meaning, and the patient’s subsequent emotion and rel¬ 
evant behavior (if any). If you have not directly asked patients for the 
meaning of their automatic thoughts, you either hypothesize (with a 
written question mark) or, better still, do the downward arrow tech¬ 
nique (pages 206-208) at the next session to uncover the meaning for 
each thought. 

The meaning of the automatic thought for each situation should 
be logically connected with the Core Belief box near the top of the 
diagram. For example, Sally’s diagram (Figure 13.2) clearly shows how 
her automatic thoughts, and the meaning of those thoughts are related 
to her core belief of incompetence. 

To complete the top box of the diagram, ask yourself (and the 
patient): How did the core belief originate and become maintained? 
What life events (especially those in childhood) did the patient experi¬ 
ence that might be related to the development and maintenance of the 
belief? Typical relevant childhood data include such significant events 
as continual or periodic strife among parents or other family members; 
parental divorce; negative interactions with parents, siblings, teachers, 
peers, or others in which the child felt blamed, criticized, or otherwise 
devalued; serious illness; death of significant others; physical or sexual 
abuse; and other adverse life conditions, such as moving frequently, 
experiencing trauma, growing up in poverty, or facing chronic discrim¬ 
ination, to name a few. 

The relevant childhood data may, however, be more subtle: for 
example, children’s perceptions (which may or may not have been 
valid) that they did not measure up in important ways to their siblings; 
that they were different from or demeaned by peers; that they did not 
meet expectations of parents, teachers, or others; or that their parents 
favored a sibling over them. 

Next ask yourself, “How did the patient cope with this painful core 
belief? Which intermediate beliefs (i.e., underlying assumptions, rules, 
and attitudes) has the patient developed?” 

Sally’s beliefs are depicted hierarchically in Figure 13.3. As Sally 
has many intermediate beliefs that could be classified as attitudes or 
rules, it is particularly useful to list the key assumptions in the box below 
the core belief. (See page 211 on how you can help a patient re-express 
an attitude or rule as an assumption.) Sally, for example, developed 
an assumption that helped her cope with the painful idea of incom¬ 
petence: “If I work very hard, then I can do okay.” Like most patients, 
she also had the flip side of the same assumption: “If I don’t work hard, 
then I’ll fail.” Most Axis I patients tend to operate according to the first 


202 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Patient’s name: S'ally _ Date: 2/22 

Diagnosis: Axis I Major depressive episode _ Avic. None 


Relevant Childhood Data 

Which experiences contributed to the deveiopment and maintenance of the core belief(s)? 
Corapared self with older brother and peers 
Critical mother 


Core Belief(s) 

What are the patient’s most centrai beliefs about him/herself? 
I’m incompetent. 


Conditional Assumptions/Beliefs/Rules 

Which positive assumption help him/her cope with his/her core belief(s)? 
What is the negative counterpart of this assumption? 

(positive) If I work very hard, I can do okay. 

(negative) If I don’t do great, then I’ve failed. 


Compensatory/Coping Strategy(ies) 

Which behaviors heip him/her cope with the beiief(s)? 

Develop high standards 

Look for shortcomings and correct 

Work very hard 

Avoid seeking help 

Overprepare 



i 1 


Situation 1 

What was the problematic 
situation? 

Talking to freshmen about 
advanced placement credits 


Situation 1 

Thinking about course 
requirements 


Situation 1 

Reflecting on difficulty 
of textbook 

I 

1 


Automatic Thought 

What went through his/her mind? 

They’re all smarter than me. 


Automatic Thought 

1 won’t be able to do it 
(research paper). 


Automatic Thought 

1 won’t make it through 
the course. 




Meaning ofthe A.T. 

What did the automatic thought 
mean to him/her? 


Meaning of the A.T 


Meaning of the A.T. 

I’m incompetent. 


I’m incompetent. 


I’m incompetent. 

I 

1 

1 

Emotion 

What emotion was associated 
with the automatic thought? 


Emotion 


Emotion 

5a d 


5a d 


5ad 

I 

1 

1 

Behavior 

What did the patient do then? 

Kept c^uiet. 


Behavior 

Cried 


Behavior 

Closed the book; 
stopped studying 


FIGURE 13.2. Sally’s Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram. Adapted from Cogni¬ 
tive behavior therapy worksheet packet. Copyright 2011 by Judith S. Beck. Bala Cynwyd, 
PA: Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. 





























































Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


203 



FIGURE 13.3. Sally’s hierarchy of beliefs and automatic thoughts. 


assumption, the one phrased in a more positive way, until they become 
psychologically distressed, at which time the negative assumption sur¬ 
faces. Note that the designation “positive” does not necessarily mean 
the belief is adaptive. 

To complete the next box, “coping strategies,” you ask yourself, 
“Which behavioral strategies did the patient develop to cope with the 
painful core belief?” Note that the patient’s broad assumptions often 
link the coping strategies to the core belief: 

“If I [engage in the coping strategy], then [my core belief may 
not come true; I’ll be okay]. However, if I [do not engage in my 
coping strategy], then [my core belief is likely to come true].” 

Sally’s strategies were to develop high standards for herself, work 
very hard, overprepare for exams and presentations, remain vigilant 
for her shortcomings, and avoid seeking help (especially in situations 
in which asking for assistance could, in her mind, expose her incompe¬ 
tence). She believes that engaging in these behaviors will protect her 
from failure and the exposure of her incompetence (and that not doing 
them comM lead to failure and exposure of incompetence). 

Another patient might have developed strategies that are the 
opposite of Sally’s behaviors: avoiding hard work, developing few goals, 
underpreparing, and asking for excessive help. Why did Sally develop 
a particular set of coping strategies while a second patient developed 

















204 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


the opposite set? Perhaps nature endowed them with different cogni¬ 
tive and behavioral styles; in interaction with the environment they 
developed different intermediate beliefs that reinforced their particu¬ 
lar behavioral strategies. The second patient, perhaps because of his 
childhood experiences, had the same core belief of incompetence, but 
coped with it by developing a different set of beliefs: “Iff set low goals 
for myself I’ll be okay, but if I set high goals I’ll fail.” “If I rely on others 
I’ll be okay, but if I rely on myself I’ll fail.” 

Note that most coping strategies are normal behaviors that every¬ 
one engages in at times. The difficulty of patients in distress lies in the 
overuse of these strategies at the expense of more functional strategies. 
Figure 13.4 lists a few examples of strategies that patients develop to 
cope with painful core beliefs. 

To summarize, the Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram is based 
on data patients present, their actual words. You should regard your 
hypotheses as tentative until confirmed by the patient. You will continu¬ 
ally reevaluate and refine the diagram as you collect additional data, 
and your conceptualization is not complete until the patient terminates 
treatment. While you might not show the actual diagram to patients, 
you will verbally (and often on paper) conceptualize their experience 
from the first session on, to help them make sense of their current reac¬ 
tions to situations. At some point, you will present the larger picture to 
patients so they can understand: 


r 


Avoid negative emotion 

Dispiay high emotion (e.g., to attract attention) 

Try to be perfect 

Purposeiy appear incompetent or heipiess 

Be overiy responsibie 

Avoid responsibiiity 

Avoid intimacy 

Seek inappropriate intimacy 

Seek recognition 

Avoid attention 

Avoid confrontation 

Provoke others 

Try to controi situations 

Abdicate controi to others 

Act cbiidiike 

Act in an authoritarian manner 

Try to piease others 

Distance seif from others or try to piease oniy 
oneseit 

V 

J 


FIGURE 13.4. Typical coping strategies. 



Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


205 


How their earlier experiences contributed to the development 
of core beliefs about themselves, their worlds, and others. 

How they developed certain assumptions or rules for living to 
help them cope with their painful core beliefs. 

• How these assumptions led to the development of particular 
coping strategies or patterns of behavior that may (or may not) 
have been adaptive at the time but are no longer adaptive in 
many situations. 


Some patients are intellectually and emotionally ready to see the larger 
picture early on in therapy; you should wait to present it to others (espe¬ 
cially those with whom you do not have a sound therapeutic relation¬ 
ship, or who do not really helieve in the cognitive model). As mentioned 
previously, whenever you present your conceptualization, ask the patient 
for conhrmation, disconhrmation, or modihcation of each part. 

Identifying Intermediate and Core Beiiefs 

You will identify intermediate beliefs hy: 

1. Recognizing when a belief is expressed as an automatic thought. 

2. Providing the first part of an assumption. 

3. Directly eliciting a rule or attitude. 

4. Using the downward arrow technique. 

5. Examining the patient’s automatic thoughts and looking for 
common themes. 

6. Asking the patient directly. 

7. Reviewing a belief questionnaire completed by the patient. 


These strategies are illustrated helow. 

1. First, a patient may actually articulate a belief as an automatic 
thought, especially when depressed. 

Therapist: What went through your mind when you got the quiz 
back? 

PATIENT: I should have done better. I can’t do anything right. I’m so 
incompetent, [core belief] 




206 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


2. Second, you may be able to elicit a full assumption by providing 

the first half of it. 

Therapist: So you had the thought “I’ll have to stay up all night work¬ 
ing.” 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: And if you don’t work as hard as you possibly can on a 
paper or a project... ? 

PATIENT: Then I haven’t done my best. I’ve failed. 

Therapist: Does this sound familiar, based on what we’ve talked about 
before in therapy? Is this generally how you view your efforts, that if 
you don’t work as hard as you can, then you’ve failed? 

Patient: Yes, I think so. 

Therapist: Can you give me some more examples so we can see how 
widespread this belief is? 


Q: What if ... patients have difficulty providing the second part of 
the assumption? 

A: Rephrase the question. 

Therapist: Let me ask you about it this way: If you don’t work as 
hard as you possibly can on a paper or project, what bad thing 
could happen? Or what bad thing would it mean? 


3. Third, you can identify a rule or an attitude by direct elicita¬ 
tion. 

Therapist: So it’s pretty important to you to do really well in your vol¬ 
unteer tutoring job? 

Patient: Oh, yes. 

Therapist: Do you remember our talking about this kind of thing 
before, having to do very well? Do you have a rule about that? 

Patient: Oh ... I hadn’t really thought of it ... I guess I have to do 
whatever I do really well. 

4. More often, you will use a fourth technique to identify interme¬ 
diate (and core) beliefs: the downward arrow technique (Burns, 1980). 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


207 


First, you identify a key automatic thought that you suspect may stem 
directly from a dysfunctional belief. Then you ask the patient for the 
meaning of this cognition, assuming the automatic thought is true. Con¬ 
tinue to do so until you have uncovered one or more important beliefs. 
Asking what a thought means to the patient often elicits an intermedi¬ 
ate belief; asking what it means about the patient usually uncovers the 
core belief. 

Therapist: Okay, to summarize, you were studying late last night, you 
were looking over your class notes, you had the thought, “These 
notes make no sense,” and you felt sad. 

PATIENT: Yes. 

Therapist: Okay, now we haven’t yet looked at the evidence to see if 
you’re right. But I’d like to see if we can hgure out why that thought 
made you feel so sad. To do that, we have to assume for a moment 
that you are right, your notes don’t make sense. What would that 
mean to you? 

PATIENT: I didn’t do a very good job in class. 

Therapist: Okay, if it’s true that you didn’t do a very good job in class, 
what would that mean? 

PATIENT: I’m a lousy student. [The assumption is, “If I don’t do a good 
job in school, it means I’m a lousy student.”] 

Therapist: Okay, if you’re a lousy student, what does that mean about 
you? 

PATIENT: [core belief] I’m not good enough. [I am incompetent.] 

Sometimes you can get stuck in the course of a downward arrow 
technique when the patient answers with a “feeling” response, such 
as “That would be terrible,” or “I’d be so anxious.” As in the example 
below, you will gently empathize, and then try to get back on track. To 
minimize the possibility that the patient will react negatively to your 
probing, you will provide a rationale for your repeated questioning and 
vary your inquiry through questions such as the following: 


“If that’s true, so what?” 

“What's so bad about...’’ 

“What's the worst part about...” 
“What does that mean about youT 




208 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


The transcript below demonstrates the provision of a brief ratio¬ 
nale and the variation of questions in the downward arrow technique. 

Therapist: It’s important for us to understand what part of this is most 
upsetting to you. What would it mean if your roommate and friends 
did get better grades than you? 

PATIENT: Oh, I couldn’t stand it. 

Therapist: So you’d be pretty upset, but what would be the worst part 
about it? 

Patient: They’d probably look down on me. 

Therapist: And if they did look down on you, what would be so bad 
about that? 

Patient: I’d hate that. 

Therapist: Sure, you’d be distressed if that happened. But so what if 
they looked down on you? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. That would be pretty bad. 

Therapist: Would it mean something about you, if they looked down 
on you? 

Patient: That I’m inferior, not as good as they are. [The assumption is 
“If people look down on me, it means I’m inferior.” The core belief 
is “I’m inferior.”] 

How do you know when to stop the downward arrow technique? 
Generally you have uncovered the important intermediate beliefs and/ 
or core belief when the patient shows a negative shift in affect, and/or 
begins to state the belief in the same or similar words. 

Therapist: And what would it mean if you are inferior and not as good 
as they are? 

Patient: Just that. I’m inferior. 

5. A fifth way to identify beliefs is to look for common themes in 
a patient’s automatic thoughts across situations. You can ask insightful 
patients whether they can identify a recurrent theme or you can make a 
hypothesis about a belief and ask the patient to reflect on its validity: 

Therapist: Sally, in a number of situations you seem to think, “I can’t 
do it,” or “It’s too hard,” or “I won’t be able to get it done.” I wonder 
whether you believe that you are somehow incompetent or inad¬ 
equate? 

PATIENT: Yes, I think I do. I do think I’m incompetent. 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


209 


6. A sixth way to identify beliefs is to ask the patient directly. Some 
patients are able to articulate their beliefs fairly easily. 

Therapist: Sally, what is your belief about asking for help? 

PATIENT: Oh, asking for help is a sign of weakness. 

7. Finally, a patient may be asked to complete a belief question¬ 
naire, such as the Dysfunctional Attitude Scale (Weissman & Beck, 
1978) or the Personality Belief Questionnaire (A. T. Beck & Beck, 
1991). Careful review of items that are strongly endorsed can highlight 
problematic beliefs. The use of such questionnaires is a useful adjunct 
to the techniques described above. 

To summarize, you can identify both intermediate and core beliefs 
in a number of ways. You can look for the expression of a belief in 
an automatic thought; provide the conditional clause (“If ...) of an 
assumption and ask the patient to complete it; directly elicit a rule; use 
the downward arrow technique; recognize a common theme among 
automatic thoughts; ask patients what they think their belief is; or you 
can review the patient’s belief questionnaire. 

Deciding Whether to Modify a Beiief 

Having identihed a belief, you need to determine whether the interme¬ 
diate belief is central or more peripheral. Generally, to conduct therapy 
as efficiently as possible, you focus on the most important intermediate 
beliefs (Safran, Vallis, Segal, & Shaw, 1986). It is not worth the time 
or effort to work on dysfunctional beliefs that are tangential, or that 
patients believe only slightly. 

Therapist: It sounds as if you believe if people don’t accept you, then 
you’re inferior. 

Patient: I guess. 

Therapist: How much do you believe that? 

Patient: Not that much, maybe 20%. 

Therapist: It doesn’t sound as if we have to work on that belief, 
then. How about if we get back to the problem we were discussing 
before? 

Having identihed an important intermediate belief, you decide 
whether you will make the belief explicit to the patient and, if so. 


210 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


whether you will merely identify the belief as one to be worked on in the 
future, or whether you will work on it at the present time. Ask yourself: 


“What is the belief?" 

“How strongly does the patient believe it?" 

“If strongly, how broadly and how strongly does it affect 
the patient’s life?” 

“If broadly and strongly, should I work on it now? Is 
it likely the patient will be able to evaluate it with 
sufficient objectivity at this point? Do we have enough 
time in the session today to begin working on it?” 


You will begin belief modihcation as soon as possible. When patients 
no longer endorse their beliefs or do not believe them as strongly, they 
will be able to interpret their experiences in a more realistic, func¬ 
tional way. But some beliefs are very deeply held, and it is advisable to 
teach patients to evaluate their more superhcial cognitions (automatic 
thoughts) hrst, so they can learn that just because they think or believe 
something doesn’t necessarily mean it is true. Belief modihcation is 
relatively easy with some patients and much more difficult with others. 
Modifying intermediate beliefs is generally accomplished before modi¬ 
fying core beliefs, as the latter may be quite rigid. 

Educating Patients about Beiiefs 

Having identihed an important belief and checked that the patient 
believes it strongly, you may decide to educate the patient about the 
nature of beliefs in general, using a specihc belief as an example. You 
might stress that there is a range of potential beliefs that the patient 
could adopt, and that beliefs are learned, not innate, and can be 
revised. 

Therapist: Okay, we’ve identihed some of your beliefs: “It’s terrible 
to do a mediocre job”; “I have to do everything great”; “If I do less 
than my best. I’m a failure.” Where do you think you learned these 
ideas? 

PATIENT: Growing up, I guess. 

Therapist: Does everyone have these same beliefs? 

PATIENT: {Thinks.) No. Some people don’t seem to care. 




Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


211 


Therapist: Can you think of someone specifically who seems to have 
different beliefs? 

PATIENT: Well, my cousin Emily, for one. 

Therapist: What belief does she have? 

Patient: I think she thinks it’s okay to be mediocre. She’s more inter¬ 
ested in having a good time. 

Therapist: So she learned different beliefs? 

PATIENT: I guess so. 

Therapist: Well, the bad news is that you currently have a set of beliefs 
that aren’t bringing you much satisfaction, right? The good news 
is that since you learned this current set of beliefs, you can unlearn 
them and learn others—maybe not as extreme as Emily’s, but some¬ 
where in between hers and yours. Plow does that sound? 

Changing Rules and Attitudes into Assumption Form 

It is often easier for patients to see the distortion in and test an inter¬ 
mediate belief that is in the form of an assumption, rather than an 
intermediate belief that is in the form of a rule or an attitude. Having 
identified a rule or an attitude, you use the downward arrow technique 
to ascertain its meaning. 

Therapist: So you believe pretty strongly that you should do things 
yourself [rule], and that it’s terrible to ask for help [attitude]. What 
does it mean to you to ask for help, for example with your school- 
work, instead of doing it yourself? 

PATIENT: It means I’m incompetent. 

Therapist: How much do you believe this idea right now, “If I ask for 
help. I’m incompetent?” 

Logical evaluation of this conditional assumption through ques¬ 
tioning or other methods often creates greater cognitive dissonance 
than does evaluation of the rule or attitude. It is easier for Sally to rec¬ 
ognize the distortion and/or dysfunctionality in the assumption “If I 
ask for help, it means I’m incompetent” than in her rule “I shouldn’t 
ask for help.” 

Examining Advantages and Disadvantages of Beliefs 

Often it is useful for patients to examine the advantages and disadvan¬ 
tages of continuing to hold a given belief. You then strive to minimize 


212 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

or undermine the advantages and emphasize and reinforce the disad¬ 
vantages. (A similar process was previously described in the section on 
evaluating the utility of automatic thoughts on pages 174-175.) 

Therapist: What are the advantages of believing if you don’t do your 
best, then you’re a failure? 

PATIENT: Well, it might make me work harder. 

Therapist: It’d be interesting to see whether you actually need such 
an extreme belief to keep you working hard. We’ll get back to that 
idea later. Any other advantages? 

PATIENT: ... No, not that 1 can think of. 

Therapist: What are the disadvantages of believing you’re a failure if 
you don’t do your best? 

PATIENT: Well, 1 feel miserable when 1 don’t do well on an exam ... 1 get 
really nervous before presentations ... 1 don’t have as much time to 
do other things 1 like because I’m so busy studying ... 

Therapist: And does it cut some enjoyment out of studying and learn¬ 
ing itself? 

PATIENT: Oh, dehnitely. 

Therapist: Okay, so on one hand, it may or may not actually be true 
that this belief is the only thing that makes you work hard. On the 
other hand, this belief about having to live up to your potential 
makes you feel miserable when you don’t do great, makes you more 
nervous than you have to be before presentations, cuts into your 
enjoyment of your work, and stops you from doing other things you 
like. Is that right? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Is this an idea, then, that you’d like to change? 

Formulating a New Belief 

In order to decide which strategies to use to modify a given belief, you 
clearly formulate to yourself a more adaptive belief. Ask yourself, “What 
belief would be more functional for the patient?” 

For example. Figure 13.5 lists Sally’s current beliefs and the new 
beliefs I have in mind. Although constructing a new belief is a collab¬ 
orative process, you nevertheless mentally formulate a range of more 
reasonable beliefs so you can appropriately choose strategies to change 
the old belief. 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


213 


Sally's old beliefs More functional beliefs 

1. If I don't do as well as If I don’t do as well as others, I'm not a failure, 
others. I’m a failure. just human. 


2. It I ask for help, It’s a 
sign of weakness. 


If I ask tor help when I need it. I’m showing good 
problem-solving abilities (which is a sign of 
strength). 


3. If I tail at work/school. 
I’m a failure as a 
person. 


It I tail at work/school, it’s not a reflection of 
my whole self. (My whole self includes how I 
am as a friend, daughter, sister, relative, citizen, 
and community member, and my qualities of 
kindness, sensitivity to others, helpfulness, etc.) 
Also, failure is not a permanent condition. 


4. I should be able to I shouldn’t be able to excel at something unless I 
excel at everything I am gifted in that area (and am willing and able to 
try. devote considerable time and effort toward it at 

the expense of other things). 


5. I should always work 
hard and do my best. 


I should put in a reasonable amount of effort 
much of the time. 


6. If I don’t live up to It I do less than my best, I have succeeded 

my potential, I have perhaps 70%, 80%, or 90%; not 0%. 

tailed. 


7. If I don’t work hard all 
the time. I’ll fail. 


It I don’t work hard all the time, I’ll probably do 
reasonably well and have a more balanced life. 




FIGURE 13.5. Formulation of more functional beliefs. 


To summarize, before you try to modify a patient’s belief, you 
confirm that it is a central, strongly held belief, and you formulate in 
your own mind a more functional, less rigid belief that is thematically 
related to the dysfunctional one, but which you believe is more realis¬ 
tic and adaptive for the patient. You do not impose this belief on the 
patient, but rather you guide the patient in a collaborative manner, 
using Socratic questioning, to construct an alternative belief. You may 
also educate the patient about the nature of beliefs (e.g., that they are 
ideas, not necessarily truths; that they have been learned and so can be 
unlearned; that they can be evaluated and modified) and/or help the 
patient assess the advantages and disadvantages of continuing to hold 
the belief. 



214 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

MODIFYING BELIEFS 

A number of strategies are useful in modifying both intermediate and 
core beliefs. (Additional techniques for modifying core beliefs are pre¬ 
sented in more detail in the next chapter.) Some beliefs may change 
easily, but many take concerted effort over a period of time. You con¬ 
tinue to ask patients how much they currently believe a given belief 
(0-100%), at both an “intellectual” and at a “gut” or “emotional” level, 
to gauge whether further work is needed. 

It is usually neither possible nor necessarily desirable to reduce 
degrees of belief to 0%. Knowing when to stop working on a belief 
is therefore a judgment call. Generally, beliefs have been sufficiently 
attenuated when patients endorse them less than 30% and when they 
are likely to continue modifying their dysfunctional behavior despite 
still holding on to a remnant of the belief. 

It is advisable for patients to keep track, in their therapy notes, of 
the beliefs they have examined. A useful format includes the dysfunc¬ 
tional belief; the new, more functional belief; and the strength of each 
belief, expressed in a percentage, as in the following example: 


Old belief'. “If I don’t achieve highly, I’m 
a failure.” (50%) 

New belief'. “I’m only an overall failure if 
I actually fail at almost everything.” 
(80%) 


A typical homework assignment is to read and rerate daily how strongly 
the patient endorses both beliefs. 

Techniques to modify beliefs are listed below. Some are the same 
as those used to modify automatic thoughts. 


1. Socrafic questioning. 

2. Behavioral experiments. 

3. Cognitive continuum. 

4. Intellectual-emotional role plays. 

5. Using others as a reference point. 

6. Acting “as if.” 

7. Self-disclosure. 





Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


215 


Socratic Questioning to Modify Beiiefs 

As illustrated in the next transcript, I use the same kinds of questions to 

examine Sally’s belief that I used in evaluating her automatic thoughts. 

Even when I identify a general helief, I help her evaluate it in the con¬ 
text of specihc situations. This specihcity helps make the evaluation 

more concrete and meaningful, and less abstract and intellectual. 

Therapist: [summarizing what they learned from the just-completed 
downward arrow technique] Okay, so you believe about 90% that if 
you ask for help, it means you’re incompetent. Is that right? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Could there be another way of viewing asking for help? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Take therapy, for example. Are you incompetent because 
you came for help here? 

PATIENT: A little, maybe. 

Therapist: Hmmm. That’s interesting, because I usually view it in the 
opposite way. Is it possible it’s actually a sign of strength and compe¬ 
tence that you came to therapy? Because what would have happened 
if you hadn’t? 

PATIENT: I might still be pulling the covers over my head. 

Therapist: Are you suggesting that asking for appropriate help when 
you have an illness like depression is a more competent thing to do 
than remaining depressed? 

PATIENT: Yeah ... I guess so. 

Therapist: Well, you tell me. Let’s say we have two depressed college 
students. One seeks treatment and the other doesn’t, but continues 
to have depressive symptoms. Which do you consider more compe¬ 
tent? 

PATIENT: Well, the one who goes for help. 

Therapist: Now how about another situation you’ve mentioned—your 
volunteer job. Again, we have two college students. This is their hrst 
tutoring experience. They’re not sure what to do because they’ve 
never done it before. One seeks help; the other doesn’t, but contin¬ 
ues to struggle. Who’s the more competent? 

PATIENT: {hesitantly) The one who goes for help? 

Therapist: Are you sure? 

Patient: {Thinks for a moment.) Yeah. It’s not a sign of competence to 
just struggle if you could get help and do better. 


216 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: How much do you believe that? 

Patient: Pretty much—80%. 

Therapist: Aud how do these two situatious—therapy aud help iu 
tutoriug—apply to you? 

PATIENT: I guess they do. 

Therapist: Let’s have you write somethiug dowu about this ... Let’s 
call the hrst idea “old belief”—uow what did you say? 

PATIENT: If I ask for help, I’m iucompeteut. 

Therapist: How much do you believe it uow? 

PATIENT: Less. Maybe 40%. 

Therapist: Okay, write “40 %” uext to it. 

Patient: {Does so.) 

Therapist: Now, write “uew belief.” How would you put that? 

Patient: If I ask for help. I’m uot iucompeteut? 

Therapist: You dou’t souud couviuced. Would it be better if you 
phrased it, “If I ask for help wheu it’s reasouable, it’s a sigu of com- 
peteuce”? 

PATIENT: Yes. {Writes that.) 

Therapist: How much do you believe the uew belief uow? 

Patient: A lot ... {Reads and ponders the new belief.) Maybe 70 to 80%. 
{Writes that down.) 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, we’ll be comiug back to these beliefs agaiu. 
How about for homework this week you do two thiugs? Oue is to 
read these beliefs every day aud rate how much you believe them— 
actually write dowu the perceutage uext to the beliefs themselves. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: [providiug a ratiouale] Writiug dowu how much you 
believe them will make you really thiuk about them. That’s why I 
didu’t say just read them. 

PATIENT: Okay. {Writes doivn the assignment.) 

Therapist: Secoud, could you be ou the lookout for other situatious 
this week where you could reasouably ask for help? That is, let’s 
imagiue that you believe the uew belief 100%, that askiug for rea¬ 
souable help is a sigu of competeuce. Wheu duriug this comiug 
week might you ask for help? Jot dowu those situatious. 

Patient: Okay. 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


217 


In the previous segment, I use Socratic questioning in the context of 
specihc situations to help Sally evaluate an intermediate belief. I judge 
that the standard questions of examining the evidence and evaluating 
outcomes will be less effective than leading Sally to develop an alterna¬ 
tive viewpoint. My questions are much more persuasive and less even- 
handed than when I help her evaluate more malleable cognitions at the 
automatic thought level. We devise a follow-up homework assignment 
that is designed to have Sally continue to reflect daily on both the dys¬ 
functional assumption and the new belief. 

Behavioral Experiments to Test Beliefs 

As with automatic thoughts, you can help patients devise behavioral 
tests to evaluate the validity of a belief. Behavioral experiments, when 
properly designed and carried out, can modify a patient’s beliefs more 
powerfully than verbal techniques in the office. 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, we’ve identihed another belief: “If I ask for 
help, others will belittle me,” and you believe that 60%. Of course, 
/haven’t actually belittled you, have I? 

PATIENT: No, of course not. But that’s your job, to help people. 

Therapist: True, but it would be useful to hnd out if other people, in 
general, are more like me or not. How could you hnd out? 
PATIENT: Ask other people for help, I guess. 

Therapist: Okay, whom could you ask and for what kind of help? 
PATIENT: Ummm. I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Could you ask your roommate? 

PATIENT: Yeah, actually I already do. And I guess I could ask my resi¬ 
dent adviser for help with something. 

Therapist: Good. How about your academic adviser? 

Patient: Uh-huh. I could also ask my brother. No. I won’t ask my room¬ 
mate or my brother. I know they wouldn’t belittle me. 

Therapist: Oh, so you know already there are some exceptions? 
PATIENT: Yes. But I guess I could go to my adviser or my teaching assis¬ 
tants. 

Therapist: What could you ask for help with? 

Patient: Well, the teaching assistants ... I could ask questions about 
the papers I have due or about the readings. The resident adviser, I 
don’t know. My academic adviser ... I would feel a little funny going 
to her. I don’t really even know what I want to major in. 


218 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: That would be an interesting experiment—going for help 
in deciding a m^or to the person whose job it is to help students 
make those kinds of decisions. 

Patient: True ... 

Therapist: So you might kill two birds with one stone—testing the 
belief that you’ll be belittled and getting some guidance for a real- 
life problem you have. 

PATIENT: I guess I could. 

Therapist: Good. So would you like to test the belief, “If I ask others for 
help, they’ll belittle me”? How would you like to do that this week? 

In the previous segment, I suggested a behavioral experiment to 
test a belief. Had I sensed that Sally felt hesitant, I would have asked 
her how likely she was to do the experiment and what practical prob¬ 
lems or thoughts might get in her way. I might also have her do covert 
rehearsal (see pages 303-305) to increase the likelihood of her follow¬ 
ing through. In addition, if I judged that there was the possibility of 
others’ belittling Sally, I might have discussed in advance what such 
belittling would mean to her and how she could cope if the belittling 
did occur. Also, I might have asked Sally for a description of belittling 
to ensure that she would not inaccurately perceive others’ behavior as 
belittling when they did not intend it to be. 

For an extensive description and discussion of behavioral experi¬ 
ments, see Bennett-Levy and colleagues (2004). 

Cognitive Continuum to Modify Beiiefs 

This technique is useful to modify both automatic thoughts and beliefs 
that reflect polarized thinking (i.e., when the patient sees something 
in all-or-nothing terms). Sally, for example, believed that if she was not 
a superior student, she was a failure. Building a cognitive continuum 
for the concept in question facilitates the patient’s recognition of the 
middle ground, as the following transcript illustrates: 

Therapist: Okay, you believe pretty strongly that if you’re not a supe¬ 
rior student, you’re a failure. Let’s see what that looks like graphi¬ 
cally. {Draws a number line.) 

Therapist: Now, where does the superior student go? 

Patient: Up here. I guess 90-100%. 

Therapist: Okay. And, you’re a failure. Where are you? 

Patient: At 0%, I guess. 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


219 


Initial Graph of Success 

I I I 

0% 90% 100% 

Sally Superior 

student 

Therapist: Now, is there anyone else who more realistically belongs at 
0% than you? 

PATIENT: Ummm ... Mayhe this guy, Jack, who’s in my economics class. 
I know he’s doing worse than I am. 

Therapist: Okay. We’ll put Jack at 0%. But I wonder if there is anyone 
who’s doing even worse than Jack? 

PATIENT: Prohahly. 

Therapist: Is it conceivahle that there is someone who is failing almost 
every test, every paper? 

PATIENT: Yeah. 

Therapist: Okay, now if we put that person at 0 %, a real failure, where 
does that put Jack? Where does that put you? 

Patient: Prohahly Jack’s at 30%. And I’m at 50%. 

Therapist: Now, how about a person who is actually failing everything, 
and he isn’t even showing up at any classes or doing any of the read¬ 
ing or turning in any papers? 

PATIENT: I guess /rewould be at 0%. 

Therapist: Where does that put the student who is at least trying but 
not passing much? 

Patient: I guess he would be at 10%. 

Therapist: Where does that put you and Jack? 

Patient: Jack goes to about 50%; I guess I’m at 75%. 


Revised Success Graph 


0% 

10% 

50% 

75% 

90% 100% 

student 

Student 

Jack 

Sally 

Superior students 

who does 

who tries, 




nothing 

but gets 
falling 
grades 





Therapist: How about for homework if you see whether even 75% is 
accurate? Even if it is for this school, perhaps for schools and stu¬ 
dents in general, you would rank higher. In any case, how accurate 
is it to call someone a failure who is at the 75% mark? 




220 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 
Patient: Not very. 

Therapist: Maybe the worst thing you can say is that he or she is 75% 
successful. 

PATIENT: Yeah. {Brightens visibly.) 

Therapist: Okay, to get back to your original idea, how much do you 
believe now that if you are not a superior student, you’re a failure? 
PATIENT: Not as much. Maybe 25%. 

Therapist: Good! 

The cognitive continuum technique is often useful when the 
patient is displaying dichotomous thinking. As with most techniques, 
you may directly teach the patient how to employ the technique herself 
so she can use it when it is applicable: 

Therapist: Sally, let’s review what we did here. We identified an all- 
or-nothing error in your thinking. Then we drew a number line to 
see whether there were really only two categories—success and fail¬ 
ure—or whether it’s more accurate to consider degrees of success. 
Can you think of anything else that you see in only two categories 
and that distresses you? 

Intellectual-Emotional Role Play 

This technique, also called point-counterpoint (Young, 1999), is usu¬ 
ally employed after you have tried other techniques such as those 
described in this chapter. It is particularly useful when patients say that 
intellectually they can see that a belief is dysfunctional, but that emotion¬ 
ally or in their gut it still “feels” true. You first provide a rationale for 
asking patients to play the “emotional” part of their mind that strongly 
endorses the dysfunctional belief, while you play the “intellectual” part. 
In the second segment you switch roles. Note in both segments you and 
patients both speak as the patient; that is, you both use the word “I.” 

Therapist: It sounds from what you’re saying that you still believe to 
some extent that you’re incompetent because you didn’t do as well 
in school last semester as you would have liked. 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: I’d like to get a better sense of what evidence you still have 
that supports your belief. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Can we do a role play? I’ll play the “intellectual” part of 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


221 


your mind that intellectually knows that just because you didn’t get 
all A’s doesn’t mean you are incompetent through and through. I’d 
like you to play the “emotional” part of your mind, that voice from 
your gut that still really believes you are incompetent. I want you 
to argue against me as hard as you can, so I can really see what’s 
maintaining the belief. Okay? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Okay, you start. Say “I’m incompetent because I didn’t get 
all A’s.” 

PATIENT: I’m incompetent because I didn’t get all A’s. 

Therapist: No, I’m not. I have a belief that I’m incompetent, but I am 
reasonably competent most of the time. 

PATIENT: No, I’m not. If I were truly competent, I would have gotten all 
A’s last semester. 

Therapist: That’s not true. Competence doesn’t equal total academic 
perfection. If that were true, only 1% of the students in the world 
would be competent, and everyone else would be incompetent. 

PATIENT: Well, I got a C in chemistry. That proves I’m incompetent. 

Therapist: That’s not right, either. If I had flunked the course perhaps 
it might be reasonable to say I wasn’t competent in chemistry, but it 
doesn’t make me incompetent in everything. Besides, maybe I really 
am competent in chemistry, but I flunked for other reasons; for 
example, I was depressed and couldn’t concentrate on my study¬ 
ing. 

PATIENT: But a truly competent person wouldn’t become depressed in 
the hrst place. 

Therapist: Actually, even truly competent people get depressed. 
There isn’t a connection there. And when truly competent people 
get depressed, their concentration and motivation dehnitely suffer 
and they don’t perform as well as usual. But that doesn’t mean they 
are incompetent through and through. 

PATIENT: I guess that’s true. They’re just depressed. 

Therapist: You’re right, but you’re out of role. Any more evidence that 
you’re completely incompetent? 

PATIENT: {Thinks for a moment.) No, I guess not. 

Therapist: Well, how about if we trade roles now, and this time you be 
the “intellectual” part who disputes my “emotional” part? And I’ll 
use your same arguments. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: I’ll start. “I’m incompetent because I don’t get all A’s.” 


222 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Switching roles provides patients with an opportunity to speak with the 
intellectual voice that you have just modeled. You use the same emo¬ 
tional reasoning and the same words that the patients used. Using their 
own words and not introducing new material help patients to respond 
more precisely to their specihc concerns. 

If patients are unable to formulate a response while in the intel¬ 
lectual role, you can either switch roles temporarily or come out of role 
to discuss the stuck point. As with any belief modihcation technique, 
you will evaluate both its effectiveness and the degree to which patients 
need further work on the belief. You do so by asking patients to rate 
how much they believe the belief after the intervention. 

Many patients hnd the intellectual-emotional role play useful. A 
few, however, feel uncomfortable doing it. As with any intervention, the 
decision to use it should be collaborative. Because it is a slightly argu¬ 
mentative technique, take special note of patients’ nonverbal reactions 
during the role play. Also take care to ensure that patients do not feel 
criticized or denigrated by the elevation of the intellectual part of their 
mind over the emotional part. 

Using Other People as a Reference Point 
in Belief Modification 

When patients consider otherpeople's beliefs, they often obtain psycho¬ 
logical distance from their own dysfunctional beliefs. They begin to see 
an inconsistency between what they believe is true or right for them¬ 
selves and what they more objectively believe is true about other people. 
Following are four examples of using other people as a reference point 
to gain distance. 


Example 1 

Therapist: Sally, you mentioned last week that you think your cousin 
Emily has a different belief about having to do everything great. 
Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Could you put what you think her belief is into words? 
PATIENT: She thinks she doesn’t have to do great. She’s an okay person, 
no matter what. 

Therapist: Do you believe she’s right? That she doesn’t have to do 
great to be an okay person? 

Patient: Oh, yes. 

Therapist: Do you see her as incompetent, through and through? 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


223 


PATIENT: Oh, no. She might not get good grades, but she’s competent 
in lots of other ways. 

Therapist: I wonder if Emily’s belief could apply to you: “If I don’t do 
great. I’m still an okay, competent person.” 

Patient: Hmmm. 

Therapist: Is there something different about Emily that makes her 
okay and competent no matter how well or poorly she does, but not 
you? 

PATIENT: {Thinks for a moment.) No. I don’t think so. I guess I hadn’t 
really thought of it that way. 

Therapist: How much do you believe right now, “If I don’t do great. 
I’m incompetent”? 

PATIENT: Less, maybe 60%. 

Therapist: And how much do you believe this new belief, “If I don’t do 
great. I’m still an okay, competent person”? 

PATIENT: More than before. Maybe 70%. 

Therapist: Good. How about if we have you write down the new belief 
and start making a list of the evidence that supports this new 
belief. 

At this point, you might introduce the Core Belief Worksheet, described 

in Chapter 14, which can be used for both core beliefs and intermediate 

beliefs. 


Example 2 

Another way to help patients modify an intermediate or core belief is 
to have them identify someone else who plainly seems to have the same 
dysfunctional belief. Sometimes patients can see the distortion in some¬ 
one else’s thinking and apply this insight to themselves. This technique 
is analogous to the Thought Record question: “If [friend’s name] was in 
this situation and had this thought, what would I tell [him/her]?” 

Therapist: Is there someone else you know who has your same belief, 
“If I don’t work hard. I’ll fail”? 

PATIENT: I’m sure my friend Rebecca, from high school, believes that. 

She’s always studying, night and day. 

Therapist: How accurate do you think that belief is for her? 

PATIENT: Oh, not at all. She’s very bright. She probably couldn’t fail if 
she tried. 


224 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: Is it possible that she might consider anything less than an 
A a failure, too? 

PATIENT: Yes, I know she does. 

Therapist: And do you agree with her, that if she gets a B, then she’s 
failed? 

PATIENT: No, of course not. 

Therapist: How would you view it? 

Patient: She got a B. An okay grade, not the best, but not a failure. 

Therapist: What belief would you like her to have? 

Patient: It’s good to work hard and try for As, but it’s not the end of 
the world if you don’t get them. And it doesn’t mean you’ve failed. 

Therapist: How does all this apply to you? 

Patient: Hmmm. I guess it’s the same. 

Therapist: Could you spell out what’s the same? 

Patient: That if I don’t get all As, I haven’t failed. I still think I should 
work hard, though. 

Therapist: Sure. It’s reasonable to want to work hard and do well. The 
unreasonable part is to believe you’ve failed if you haven’t done 
perfectly. Do you agree with that? 

Example 3 

You could also do a role play with patients in which you instruct them 

to convince another person that the belief they both share is invalid for 

the other person. 

Therapist: Sally, you say you think your roommate also believes that 
she shouldn’t go to a professor for help because he might think 
she’s unprepared or not smart enough? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Do you agree with her? 

Patient: No. She’s probably wrong. But even if he is critical, it doesn’t 
mean he’s right. 

Therapist: Could we try to role-play this? I’ll be your roommate; you 
give me advice. Don’t let me get away with any distorted thinking. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: I’ll start. Sally, I don’t understand this stuff. What should 
Ido? 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


225 


PATIENT: Go to the professor. 

Therapist: Oh, I couldn’t do that. He’ll think I’m dumb. He’ll think 
I’m wasting his time. 

PATIENT: Hey, it’s his job to help students. 

Therapist: But he probably doesn’t like students bothering him. 

PATIENT: Tough, that’s what he’s getting paid for. Anyway, good profes¬ 
sors like to help students. If he’s impatient, that says something 
about him, not about you. 

Therapist: But even if he doesn’t mind helping, he’ll hnd out how 
confused I am. 

PATIENT: That’s okay. He won’t expect you to know everything. That’s 
why you’re coming to him. 

Therapist: What if he thinks Tm dumb? 

PATIENT: First of all, you wouldn’t be here if you were dumb. Second, if 
he does expect you to know everything, he’s just wrong. If you did 
know everything, you wouldn’t be taking his course. 

Therapist: I still think I shouldn’t go. 

Patient: No, you should. Don’t let his snobby attitude make you feel 
like you’re imposing or you’re dumb. You’re not. 

Therapist: Okay. I’m convinced. Out of role, how does what you told 
your roommate apply to you? 

Example 4 

Finally, many patients can get distance from a belief by using their own 

children (or children they know) as a reference point, or by imagining 

that they have children. 

Therapist: Sally, so you believe 80% that if you don’t do as well as 
everyone else, then you’ve failed? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: I wonder, can you imagine that you have a daughter? She’s 
10 years old and in hfth grade, and she comes home one day very, 
very upset because her friends got As on a test and she got a C. 
Would you want her to believe that she’s a failure? 

PATIENT: No, of course not. 

Therapist: Why not? ... What would you like her to believe? {Sally 
responds.) Now how does what you’ve just said apply to you? 


226 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Acting “As If” 

Changes in belief often lead to corresponding changes in behavior. 
And changes in behavior, in turn, often lead to corresponding changes 
in belief. If a belief is fairly weak, the patient may be able to change a 
target behavior easily and quickly, without much cognitive intervention. 
Many beliefs do require some modification before the patient is willing 
to change behaviorally. However, frequently only some belief modifica¬ 
tion, not complete belief change, is needed. And once patients begin to 
change their behavior, the belief itself becomes somewhat more attenu¬ 
ated (which makes it easier to continue the new behavior, which further 
attenuates the belief, and so on, in a positive upward spiral). 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, how much do you believe now that it’s a sign of 
weakness to ask for help? 

PATIENT: Not as much. Maybe 50%. 

Therapist: That’s a good drop. Would it be to your benefit to act as if 
you don’t believe it at all? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure what you mean. 

Therapist: If you didn’t believe it was a sign of weakness, in fact, if you 
believed it was good to ask for help, what might you do this week? 
Patient: Well, we’ve been talking about my going to see the teaching 
assistant. I guess if I really believed it was good to ask for help, I 
would go. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: I might try to find a tutor for Economics ... I might ask to bor¬ 
row notes from the guy down the hall... 

Therapist: Hey, that’s good. And what positive things could happen if 
you did some of these things? 

Patient: {Laughs.) I could get the help that I need. 

Therapist: Do you think you’re ready this week to act as if you believe 
it’s a good thing to ask for help? 

Patient: Maybe. 

Therapist: Okay, in a minute, we’ll find out what thoughts might get 
in the way, but first, how about if you jot down those ideas you had. 
And do you want to write down this technique to get you going? Act 
as if you believe the new belief, even if you don’t totally. 

This acting “as if” technique is equally applicable to core beliefs as 
are the preceding intermediate belief modification techniques. 


Identifying and Modifying Intermediate Beliefs 


227 


Using Self-Disclosure to Modify Beliefs 

Using appropriate and judicious self-disclosure can help some patients 
view their problems or beliefs in a different way. The self-disclosure, of 
course, should be genuine and relevant: 

Therapist: You know, Sally, when I was in college, I had some trouble 
going to professors for help because I thought I’d be showing my 
ignorance too. And to tell you the truth, the few times I did end 
up doing it anyway, I had mixed results. Sometimes the professors 
were really nice and helpful. But a couple of times, they were pretty 
brusque, just told me to reread a chapter or something. The point 
is, just because I didn’t understand something didn’t mean I was 
incompetent. And the professors who were brusque—well, I think 
that said a lot more about them than about me. {pause) What do 
you think? 

In summary, you help patients to identify intermediate beliefs by 
recognizing when a belief has been expressed as an automatic thought, 
by providing part of an assumption, by directly eliciting a rule or an atti¬ 
tude, by using the downward arrow technique, by looking for common 
themes among the patient’s automatic thoughts, and/or by reviewing a 
belief questionnaire completed by the patient. You next determine how 
important the belief is by ascertaining how strongly the patient believes 
it, and how broadly and strongly it affects her functioning. Then you 
decide whether to begin the task of modifying it in the current session 
or wait for future sessions. When beginning belief modification work, 
you educate the patient about the nature of beliefs, change rules and atti¬ 
tudes into assumption form, and explore the advantages and disadvantages 
of a given belief. You mentally formulate a new, more functional belief and 
guide the patient toward its adoption through many belief modification 
techniques, including Socratic questioning, behavioral experiments, 
cognitive continua, intellectual-emotional role plays, using others as a 
reference point, acting “as if,” and self-disclosure. Some of these tech¬ 
niques are more persuasive than standard Socratic questioning of auto¬ 
matic thoughts, because the beliefs are much more rigidly held. These 
same techniques can also be used to modify core beliefs. 


Chapter 14 

^30 


IDENTIFYING AND MODIFYING 
CORE BELIEFS 


C ore beliefs, as described in Chapter 3, are one’s most central ideas 
about the self. Some authors refer to these beliefs as schemas. Beck 
(1964) differentiates the two by suggesting that schemas are cogni¬ 
tive structures within the mind, the specific content of which are core 
beliefs. Furthermore, he theorizes that negative core beliefs essentially 
fall into two broad categories: those associated with helplessness and 
those associated with unlovability (Beck, 1999). A third category, asso¬ 
ciated with worthlessness, has also been described (J. S. Beck, 2005). 
Some patients have core beliefs that fall in one category; others have 
core beliefs in two or all three categories. 

People develop these beliefs from an early age, as children, with 
their genetic predisposition toward certain personality traits, interact 
with significant others, and encounter a series of situations. For much 
of their lives, most people maintain relatively positive and realistic core 
beliefs (e.g., “1 am substantially in control”; “1 can do most things com¬ 
petently”; “1 am a functional human being”; “1 am likable”; “I am worth¬ 
while”). Negative core beliefs may surface only during times of psycho¬ 
logical distress. (Some patients with personality disorders, however, 
may have almost continuously activated negative core beliefs.) Often, 
unlike automatic thoughts, core beliefs that patients “know” to be true 
about themselves are not fully articulated until you peel back the layers 
by continuing to ask for the meaning of their thoughts. 


228 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


229 


It is important to note that patients may also have negative core 
beliefs about other people and their worlds: “Other people are untrust¬ 
worthy”; “Other people will hurt me”; “The world is a rotten place”; 
“The world is dangerous.” Fixed, overgeneralized ideas such as these 
often need to be evaluated and modihed, in addition to core beliefs 
about the self. 

Before Sally became depressed, she recognized when she was act¬ 
ing competently and interpreted signs of possible incompetence as situ¬ 
ation specihc; for example, when she got a lower grade than expected 
on a paper in high school, she took it as an instance of inadequacy, 
but she did not interpret this situation as meaning she was an overall 
incompetent person. 

As Sally was becoming depressed, her positive schema became deac¬ 
tivated and her negative schema containing the cognition “I am incom¬ 
petent” became almost fully activated. As illustrated on page 34, Sally 
began to overemphasize and overgeneralize negative data, contained 
in negative rectangles, continually reinforcing her belief that she was 
incompetent. At the same time, Sally was failing to recognize a signih- 
cant amount of positive data related to her schema (such as resuming 
her usual activities even though the depression made it very difficult 
to do so); these positive triangles “bounced off” the schema and did 
not get incorporated. Sally also discounted much positive information 
through her “Yes, but...” interpretations of her experiences (“Yes, I did 
well on the quiz, but it was easy.”; “Yes, I helped the kid I was tutoring, 
but I got lucky because I really didn’t know what I was doing.”). These 
positive triangles were, in essence, changed into negative rectangles. 

Sally was not volitionally processing information in this dysfunc¬ 
tional way. This kind of information processing is automatic and a 
symptom of depression. I recognized that it would be important to work 
directly on modifying her negative core belief, not only to alleviate her 
current depression, but also to prevent or reduce the severity of future 
episodes. 

For example, one day when Sally was depressed, she received a B- 
on an exam. She immediately understood this data as signifying that 
she was an incompetent person. When she received an A on a paper the 
next day, her mind automatically discounted this positive evidence that 
was contrary to her negative core belief. She believed the good grade 
was not an indication of competence; in fact, she believed that she was 
incompetent and that she had merely “fooled” the professor. She also 
failed to recognize other positive data; for example, that she got to 
every class on time. (Note that had she gotten to class late or skipped 
class, she would have interpreted those experiences in a negative light, 
as conhrming her negative core belief.) 


230 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


You will begin to work directly on belief modification as early in 
treatment as possible. Once patients change their beliefs, they are less 
likely to process data in a maladaptive way. In specific situations, they 
have different (more adaptive and realistic) automatic thoughts and 
improved reactions. You may not succeed with early belief modification, 
though, if patients: 


• Have core beliefs that are quite rigid and overgeneralized. 

• Do not yet believe that cognitions are ideas and not 
necessarily truths. 

• Experience very high levels of affect when beliefs are 
elicited or questioned. 

• Do not have a strong enough alliance with you (they 
may not trust you sufficiently; they may not perceive 
you as understanding who they really are; they may feel 
Invalidated by the process of belief evaluation). 


In these cases, you will teach patients the tools of identifying, evaluat¬ 
ing, and adaptively responding to automatic thoughts and intermediate 
beliefs before using the same tools for core beliefs. 

You may unwittingly try to evaluate a core belief early in treatment 
because it has been expressed as an automatic thought. Such evalua¬ 
tion may have little effect. In another case, you may intentionally test 
the modifiability of a core belief even before you have done much work 
at the automatic thought and intermediate belief level. 

The degree of difficulty in identifying and modifying core beliefs 
varies from patient to patient. In general, patients who are in significant 
emotional distress are more easily able than others to express their core 
beliefs (because the beliefs are activated in session). And, in general, it 
is far easier to modify the negative core beliefs of Axis I patients whose 
counterbalancing positive core beliefs have been activated throughout 
much of their lives. Negative core beliefs of patients with personality 
disorders are usually much more difficult to modify (J. S. Beck, 2005; 
Beck et ah, 2004; Young, 1999) because they typically have fewer posi¬ 
tive core beliefs, their positive core beliefs are weaker, and they have 
developed a multitude of strongly held negative core beliefs that inter¬ 
connect and support each other like a network. 

In identifying and modifying core beliefs, you do the following 
during the course of treatment (each step is described later in this 
chapter): 



Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


231 


1 . Mentally hypothesize from which category of core belief 
(“helplessness” or “unlovability” or “worthlessness”) specific 
automatic thoughts appear to have arisen (see Figure 14.1). 

2 . Specify the core belief (to yourself) using the same techniques you 
use to identify patients’ intermediate beliefs. 

3. Present your hypothesis about the core belief to patients, asking 
for confirmation or disconfirmation; refine your hypothesis about 
the core belief as patients provide additional data about current 
and childhood situations and their reactions to them. 

4 . Educate patients about core beliefs in general and about their 
specific core beliefs; guide patients in monitoring the operation of 
the core belief in the present. 

5 . Help patients specify and strengthen a new, more adaptive core 
belief. 

6. Begin to evaluate and modify the negative core belief with 
patients; examine the childhood origin of the core belief 
(if applicable), its maintenance through the years, and its 
contribution to patients' present difficulties; continue to 
monitor the activation of the core belief in the present; use both 
“intellectual” and “emotional” or experiential methods to decrease 
the strength of the old core belief and to increase the strength of 
the new core belief. 


CATEGORIZING CORE BELIEFS 

As mentioned previously, patients’ core beliefs may be categorized in 
tbe helplessness realm, the unlovability realm, and/or the worthlessness 
realm. Whenever patients present data (problems, automatic thoughts, 
emotions, behavior, history), you “listen” for the category of core belief 
that seems to have been activated. For example, when Sally expresses 
thoughts about her work being too hard, about her inability to concen¬ 
trate, and about her fears of failing, I hypothesize that a core belief in 
the helpless category was operating. Sally occasionally mentions auto¬ 
matic thoughts that her friends might not want to spend time with her 
because she is depressed. When I do the downward arrow technique, 
asking what that means about her, she shrugs and says, with little emo¬ 
tion: “I just won’t have anyone to hang out with.” Sally does not seem to 
have a significant core belief of unlovability. 



232 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Another patient consistently expresses thoughts of others not car¬ 
ing about him and fears that he is too different from others to sustain 
a relationship. This patient has a core belief in the category of unlov- 
ability. A third patient is frustrated by her inability to get others to listen 
to her. Although her distress occurs only in interpersonal situations, 
she does not believe that she is unlovable. Her core belief of helpless¬ 
ness is what gets activated. Finally, a fourth patient feels like a worth¬ 
less human being, not because he cannot achieve (a helpless belief), 
and not related to his relationships (which might possibly be an unlov¬ 
able belief). He believes that morally, he is a bad person (a worthless 
belief). 

The top of Figure 14.1 lists typical core beliefs in the helpless cat¬ 
egory. Themes include being ineffective: 

• In getting things done (“Tm inadequate”; “Tm incompetent”; “1 
can’t do anything right”). 

• In protecting oneself (“Tm vulnerable, weak, powerless, 
trapped”). 

• In achievement (“Tm a failure, 1 don’t measure up. I’m a 
loser”). 

The middle of Figure 14.1 lists typical core beliefs in the unlovable cat¬ 
egory. Themes include being unlikable, undesirable, unappealing, or 
defective (not in achievement or morality, but being defective in char¬ 
acter so as to preclude gaining the sustained love and caring of others). 
The bottom of Figure 14.1 lists worthless core beliefs. When patients 
have beliefs in this category, they are not unduly concerned with their 
efffectiveness or lovability. They just believe that they are bad, unwor¬ 
thy, or even dangerous to other people. 

Sometimes it is clear in which category a given core belief belongs, 
especially when patients actually use words such as “1 am helpless,” or 
“1 am unlovable.” At other times, you may not know initially which cat¬ 
egory of core belief has been activated. For example, depressed patients 
may say, “I’m not good enough.” You need to ascertain the meaning 
of the cognition to determine whether they believe they are not good 
enough to achieve or to gain respect (helpless category), or if they are 
not good enough for others to love them (unlovable category). 

To summarize, you begin mentally to formulate a hypothesis about 
patients’ core beliefs whenever they provide data in the form of their 
automatic thoughts (and associated meanings) and reactions (emo¬ 
tions and behaviors). You hrst make a gross distinction (to yourself) 
among cognitions that seem to fall in the helpless, unlovable, or worth¬ 
less categories. 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


233 


Helpless core beliefs 

“I am incompetent.” 

‘‘I am ineffective.” 

“i can't do anything right.' 
‘‘i am helpiess.” 

‘‘i am poweriess.” 

‘‘i am weak.” 

‘‘i am vuinerabie.” 

‘‘i am a victim.” 


‘‘i am needy.” 

“i am trapped.” 

“i am out of control.” 

“I am a failure.” 

“I am defective” [i.e., I do not measure up to 
others]. 

“I am not good enough” [in terms of 
achievement]. 



“1 am a loser.” 

Unlovable core beliefs 

‘‘1 am unlovable.” 

“1 am different.” 

“1 am unlikeable.” 

“1 am bad [so others will not love me].” 

“1 am undesirable.” 

“1 am defective [so others will not love me].” 

‘‘1 am unattractive.” 

“1 am not good enough [to be loved by others]. 

‘‘1 am unwanted.” 

“1 am bound to be rejected.” 

‘‘1 am uncared tor.” 

“1 am bound to be abandoned.” 

“1 am bound to be alone.” 

Worthless core beliefs 

‘‘1 am worthless.” 

“1 am immoral.” 

“1 am unacceptable.” 

“1 am dangerous.” 

“1 am bad.” 

“1 am toxic.” 

‘‘1 am a waste.” 

“1 am evil.” 

“1 don't deserve to live.” 


FIGURE 14.1. Categories of core beliefs. Adapted from Cognitive therapy for chal¬ 
lenging problems: What to do when the basics don’t work. Copyright 2005 by Judith S. 
Beck. New York: Guilford Press. 


IDENTIFYING CORE BELIEFS 

You use the same techniques to identify patients’ specihc core beliefs 
that you used when identifying their intermediate beliefs (see Chapter 
13). In addition to the downward arrow technique, you look for central 
themes in patients’ automatic thoughts, watch for core beliefs expressed as auto¬ 
matic thoughts, and directly elicit the core belief. 

You will often identify a core belief early in therapy to conceptual¬ 
ize patients and plan treatment. You may gather data about and even try 
to help patients evaluate their core beliefs early on. In some cases, such 
early evaluation is ineffective but helps you test the strength, breadth, 
and modihability of the core belief. 













234 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: What went through your mind when you couldn’t hnish 
the statistics assignment? 

PATIENT: I can’t do anything right. I’ll never he ahle to make it here. 

Therapist: [downward arrow technique] And if that’s true, that you 
can’t do anything right and you can’t make it here, what does that 
mean? 

PATIENT: [core belief] I’m hopeless. I’m so incompetent. 

Therapist: How much do you helieve you’re incompetent? 

Patient: Oh, 100%. 

Therapist: And how incompetent are you: a little, a lot? 

PATIENT: Completely. I’m completely incompetent. 

Therapist: In every way? 

Patient: Just about. 

Therapist: Any evidence that you’re not incompetent? 

PATIENT: No ... No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: Did you say you’re doing okay in your other courses? 
PATIENT: Yes, but not as well as I should be. 

Therapist: Does the fact that you’re doing okay in them contradict 
this idea that you’re incompetent? 

PATIENT: No, if I were really competent. I’d be doing much better. 

Therapist: How about other areas of your life—managing your apart¬ 
ment, managing your hnances, taking care of yourself... ? 
PATIENT: I’m doing pretty badly at them, too. 

Therapist: So this idea that you’re incompetent extends to other 
things, too? 

PATIENT: Just about everything. 

Therapist: Okay, I can see how strongly you believe this idea. Can we 
go back to the situation in which you couldn’t hnish the statistics 
assignment and you had the thoughts: “I can’t do anything right. 
I’ll never be able to make it here.” 

In this example, I use the downward arrow technique to identify an 
idea I conceptualize as a core belief. I gently test its strength, breadth, 
and modihability, and decide not to pursue further evaluation at this 
time. However, I label it as an “idea” (implying it is not necessarily a 
truth) and mark it as a future topic. 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


235 


PRESENTING CORE BELIEFS 

When you believe that you have collected sufficient data to hypothesize 
about the core belief, and when you believe patients will be sufficiently 
receptive, you tentatively pose your conceptualization to them, as I did 
below. 

Therapist: Sally, we’ve talked about a number of different problems 
in the past few weeks—^your schoolwork, decisions about how to 
spend the summer, your volunteer job. Whenever we examine your 
thoughts, and ask you what they mean about you, you consistently 
say they mean that you’re incompetent... Is that right? 

PATIENT: Yes. I still think I’m incompetent. 

Or you might review with patients a number of related automatic 
thoughts they had in a variety of situations and then ask them to draw 
a conclusion as to an underlying pattern (“Sally, do you see a common 
theme in these automatic thoughts?”). 

With certain patients you can use a hand-drawn diagram, a simpli¬ 
fied version of the Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram (page 200), 
early in treatment. Either with or without the diagram, you might briefly 
explore childhood precursors. 

Therapist: Do you remember feeling incompetent like this at other 
times in your life, too? As a child? 

PATIENT: Yeah, sometimes. I remember never being able to do things 
my brother could. 

Therapist: Can you give me some examples? 

You will use historical data later, when you hypothesize to patients how 
they came to believe a core belief, and explain how the core belief could 
be untrue or mostly untrue even though they currently believe it so 
strongly. 


EDUCATING PATIENTS ABOUT CORE BELIEFS 
AND MONITORING THEIR OPERATION 


It is important for patients to understand the following about a core 
belief: 


236 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


• That it is an idea, not necessarily a truth. 

That they can believe it quite strongly, even “feel” it to be 
true, and yet it might be mostly or entirely untrue. 

That, as an idea, it can be tested. 

• That it may be rooted in childhood events, and may or 
may not have been true at the time they first came to 
believe it. 

• That it continues to be maintained through the operation 
of their schemas, in which they readily recognize data 
that support the core belief while ignoring or discounting 
data to the contrary. 

• That you and they, working together, can use a variety of 
strategies over time to change this idea so that they can 
view themselves in a more realistic way. 


In the transcript that follows, I educate Sally about her core 
belief. (She had previously confirmed the conceptualization I had pre¬ 
sented.) 

Therapist: Sally, does this [automatic thought that she will not be able 
to write her economics paper] sound familiar? Do you think your 
idea that you’re incompetent could be getting in the way? 

PATIENT: Yeah. I do feel incompetent. 

Therapist: Well, Sally, one of two things has been going on. The prob¬ 
lem is either you really are incompetent, and we’ll have to do some 
work together to make you more competent ... or the problem is 
that you believe you are incompetent; and sometimes, you believe 
it so strongly that you actually act in an incompetent way, like not 
going to the library to start researching your paper, {pause) What 
do you think? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: Why don’t we write these two possibilities on paper? This is 
what I’d like to start doing in therapy, if it is okay with you, seeing 
which possibility seems more true—that you really are incompe¬ 
tent, or that you believeyou’re incompetent. 

Later I explain core beliefs to Sally, in small parts, making sure she 
understands as I proceed. 



Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


237 


Therapist: This idea, “Tm incompetent,” is what we call a core belief. 
Let me tell you a little bit about core beliefs so you’ll understand 
why they’re more difficult to evaluate and respond to. Okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: First of all, a core belief is an idea that you may not believe 
very strongly when you’re not depressed. On the other hand, we’d 
expect you to believe it almost completely when you are depressed, 
even if there’s evidence to the contrary, {pause) Follow me so far? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: When you get depressed, this idea becomes activated. 
When it’s activated, you’ll easily notice any evidence that seems to 
support it, and you’ll tend to ignore any evidence that contradicts 
it. It’s as if there is a screen around your head. Anything that fits in 
with the idea that you are incompetent sails straight through the 
screen and into your head. Any information that contradicts the 
idea won’t fit through the screen, and so either you don’t notice it, 
or you change it in some way so it will fit through the screen. Do you 
think you might be screening information like this? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Well, let’s see. Looking back at the past few weeks, what 
evidence is there that you might be competent? 

PATIENT: Ummm ... I got an A on my statistics exam. 

Therapist: Good! And did that evidence go right through the screen? 
Did you tell yourself, “I got an A. That means I’m smart or compe¬ 
tent or a good student,” or anything like that? 

PATIENT: No. I said, “Well, the exam was easy. I learned some of that 
stuff last year.” 

Therapist: Oh, so it looks like the screen was operating. Do you see 
how you discounted information that contradicted your core belief, 
“I am incompetent”? 

Patient: Hmmm. 

Therapist: Can you think of any other examples from this week? Situ¬ 
ations where a reasonable person might think something you did 
showed you were competent, even if you didn’t? 

PATIENT: {Thinks for a moment.) Well, I helped my roommate figure out 
how to solve a problem with her father. But that doesn’t count; any¬ 
one could have done what I did. 

Therapist: Good example. Again, it sounds as if you didn’t recognize 
information that doesn’t fit in with your idea: “I’m incompetent.” 


238 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

I’m going to let you think about how true the idea is that anyone 
could have done what you did. Maybe this is another instance of not 
giving yourself credit, when another person might have thought it 
was evidence that you are not incompetent. 

PATIENT: Well, my roommate did think I helped her a lot. 

Therapist: Okay, just to summarize: “I’m incompetent” seems to be 
a core belief that goes back a long time with you, and which you 
believe much more strongly when you’re depressed. Can you sum¬ 
marize how it seems to work? 

PATIENT: Well, you’re saying that when I’m depressed, I screen in infor¬ 
mation that agrees with it and I screen out information that doesn’t 
agree with it. 

Therapist: Right. How about for homework this week if you try to 
notice each day how the screen is operating—jot down information 
that seems to support the idea that you’re incompetent. And here’s 
the harder part. Really hunt for and jot down any information that 
another person might think contradicts it. Okay? 

In the next session, I explain why Sally believes her core belief so 

strongly and how it could still be untrue. 

Therapist: Okay, you did a good job this week noticing how you tend 
to let in only the negative information that seems to support your 
idea that you’re incompetent. As we predicted, it was much harder 
to recognize positive information that contradicts your idea. 

PATIENT: Yeah. I didn’t do it very well. 

Therapist: Are you feeling incompetent now? 

PATIENT: {Laughs.) Yes. I guess so. 

Therapist: Is the screen operating right now? Did you put more 
emphasis on the part of the homework you didn’t do as well, and 
forget about the part you did do well? 

PATIENT: I guess I did. 

Therapist: What do you think is the effect of having a screen like 
this? 

PATIENT: Makes me not notice the good things. 

Therapist: Right. And, day after day, what happens to this idea, “I’m 
incompetent”? 

PATIENT: Gets stronger, I guess. 

Therapist: Right. To the point where it “feels” true, even if it’s not. 

Patient: Hmmm. 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


239 


Therapist: Do you see now how the idea that you’re incompetent could 
he false, even though it feels so true? 

PATIENT: Well, I can kind of see it intellectually, hut I still do feel incom¬ 
petent. 

Therapist: That’s pretty common. In the next few weeks, we’ll keep 
evaluating this idea. And then we’ll work together on helping the 
more reasonable, intellectual part of your mind talk to the more 
emotional side. Okay? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Alternatively, I could have drawn the schema diagram from page 
34 and elicited the same examples of positive and negative data, and 
asked Sally whether she thought the diagram accurately illustrated how 
she was processing information. I would then ask her, “Sally, if it’s true 
that you’ve heen overemphasizing the negative data and ignoring or 
discounting the positive data, can you see how your idea that you’re 
incompetent could grow stronger with each passing hour and each 
passing day and week and month—hut it might not he true, or not com¬ 
pletely true?” 

Bihliotherapy can reinforce important core belief work. Prisoners 
of Belief (McKay & Fanning, 1991) and Reinventing Your Life (Young & 
Klosko, 1994) are helpful in this phase of treatment. 


DEVELOPING A NEW CORE BELIEF 

Many depressed patients had a different core belief, a more positive, 
reality-based, and functional idea about themselves, before the onset of 
their Axis I disorder. They may easily identify this belief. 

Therapist: Before you got depressed, say a year ago, how did you see 
yourself? Did you think you were unlikable? 

PATIENT: No; I mean, not everyone liked me, but I basically thought I 
was a good person. People liked me. 

Therapist: So was your belief “I’m likable”? 

Patient: Yeah, it was. 

When patients cannot express their former idea, you mentally 
devise a new, more realistic, and functional belief and guide patients 
toward it. A relatively positive belief is generally easier for patients to 
adopt than a belief that is at an extreme. 

For example: 


240 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Old core belief 


New core belief 

“I'm generally a likable person” 
“I'm okay.” 

“I have control over many things.” 
“I'm normal, with both strengths 
and weaknesses.” 


“I'm (completely) unlovable.” 
“I'm bad.” 


“I'm powerless.” 
“I'm defective.” 


Therapist: Sally, we've been talking about this core belief, “I'm incom¬ 
petent.” What do you intellectually think a more accurate belief 
might be? 

PATIENT: I am competent? 

Therapist: That's good. Or we could work on a new belief that might 
be easier for you to adopt, say, “Tm competent in most ways, but I'm 
only human, too.” Which sounds better? 

PATIENT: The second. 

Having identified a negative core belief and devised a positive belief, 
you will simultaneously work on weakening the first and strengthening 
the latter. 


STRENGTHENING NEW CORE BELIEFS 


You will primarily strengthen new core beliefs in two ways. One, from 
the beginning of treatment, as described on pages 26-27, you deliber¬ 
ately elicit positive data from patients through questioning, and you 
also point out positive data to them—especially when the data contra¬ 
dict the old, negative core belief but support a new, more reality-based 
belief. Two, when specifically working on strengthening their new core 
beliefs, you ask patients to examine their experiences in a new way that 
facilitates their ability to recognize positive data themselves. 

I accomplished the tasks of eliciting and pointing out positive data 
in several ways with Sally. For example: 

• At the evaluation, I asked Sally what her strengths were. 

• Later, whenever applicable, I asked her whether certain data indi¬ 
cated other strengths. (“So you did all these things: you made a 
list of all your assignments for this week and figured out when 
you would do them and what resources you would need. Is being 
organized a strength of yours?”) 

• During the first part of the session, I asked Sally about her posi¬ 
tive experiences (“What positive things happened since I saw 



Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


241 


you last? ”). Finishing a paper, doing reasonably well on an exam, 
being assertive with her roommate, hguring out which classes to 
sign up for, starting a self-defense class, to name a few examples, 
all provided data that I emphasized at the time and later that 
supported her new core belief. 

• I suggested that Sally keep a credit list (page 275). 

• I continually asked Sally for (positive) evidence that her cogni¬ 
tions were not true, or not completely true. 

• I asked for her attribution when she displayed positive behaviors 
(“What does it say about you that yow were the one to initiate the 
recycling project?”). 

• I provided her with feedback about her accomplishments and 
positive qualities (“It sounds like you did a great job organizing 
the get-together for the dorm”). 

The second strategy involves helping patients adopt a different 
view of their experiences. They do so by asking themselves what they 
are doing or what is happening that could lend support to the new core 
belief. (“Sally, can you keep track this coming week of anything that 
shows that you are competent?”) If patients have difficulty with this 
assignment, you can modify it. (“Sally, could you pretend I’m following 
you around this week? Notice the times when you think / would say, 
‘That shows you’re competent,’ or could you notice what your room¬ 
mate does that shows you she’s competent—and then see whether you’re 
doing the same thing?”) 

Most patients need a visual or audio cue to remind themselves to look 
for positive data throughout the day, for example, they can wear a rub¬ 
ber band around their wrist, post sticky notes, have pop-up reminders on 
their computers or smartphones, or set the alarm on their cell phone to 
ring periodically. Encourage them to record the data in some way, instead 
of just making mental notes that they are likely to forget. A Core Belief 
Worksheet (Figure 14.3) can help them organize their note taking. 

Finally, it is important to track with patients how strongly they 
believe their new core belief over time, both at an intellectual level 
and an emotional level. You will elicit instances in which their degree 
of belief was relatively higher and reinforce their interpretation, and 
you will help them reframe the meaning of experiences in which their 
belief was relatively lower. 


MODIFYING NEGATIVE CORE BELIEFS 

To help patients change their negative core beliefs, you will use many 
techniques described in the previous chapter, as well as others that are 


242 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


r 

A 

Already described 

Additional techniques 

Socratic questioning techniques 

Core Beliet Worksheet 

Examining advantages and disadvantages 

Extreme contrasts 

Intellectual-emotional role plays 

Stories and metaphors 

Acting “as it” 

Historical tests 

Behavioral experiments 

Restructuring early memories 

Cognitive continuum 

Coping cards 

Selt-disclosure 


V 

) 


FIGURE 14.2. Techniques to modify core beliefs. 


described below (see Figure 14.2). Core beliefs usually change at the 
intellectual level first, especially when you have been employing intel¬ 
lectual-level techniques. Patients may need emotional-level techniques 
to change their core beliefs at the emotional level. 


THE CORE BELIEF WORKSHEET 

Having identified the old core belief and developed a new one, you may 
introduce the Core Belief Worksheet (CBW; see Figure 14.3), or draw 
a modified chart. 

Patients fill out the CBW in session and for homework as they moni¬ 
tor the operation of their beliefs and reframe evidence that seemed to 
support the old belief. 

Therapist: Sally, let me show you a Core Belief Worksheet, which is 
just an organized way of working on your beliefs. I’d like us to keep 
this sheet in front of us during our sessions to see whether the topic 
we’re discussing is relevant to competency. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Learning to fill out this sheet takes time and practice, just 
as it took you a while to get good at the Thought Record. Okay? 
Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: All right. Is it okay if we start with the right side, evidence 
that you’re incompetent? 

Patient: Sure. 



Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


243 


r 

Evidence supporting new core belief 

I’m competent but human 

Did well on literature paper. 

Asked a question in statistics. 

Understand this worksheet. 

Made decisions about next year. 

Arranged to switch phones, bank 
accounts, insurance, etc. 

Got together all the references I need 
for econ paper. 

Understood most of Chapter 6 in 
statistics book. 

Explained statistics concept to guy 
down the hall. 


Evidence supporting old core belief 
I’m incompetent with reframe 

Didn’t understand econ concept in 
class BUT I hadn't read about it and I'll 
probably understand it later. At worst 
it's an incompetency but maybe it’s 
actually her fault for not explaining it 
well enough. 

Didn't go to the teaching assistant 
for help BUT that doesn't mean I'm 
incompetent. I was nervous about 
going because I think I should be able 
to figure out these things myself and I 
thought he'd think I was unprepared. 

Got a B on my literature paper, BUT 
it's an okay grade. If I were really 
incompetent, I wouldn't even be here. 


FIGURE 14.3. Sally s Core Belief Worksheet. From Cognitive behavior therapy work¬ 
sheet packet. Copyright 2011 by Judith S. Beck. Bala Cynwyd, PA: Beck Institute for 
Cognitive Behavior Therapy. 


Therapist: Okay, think over what you did today. What evidence do you 
have that you’re incompetent? 

PATIENT: Well, I didn’t understand something my economics professor 
presented in class today. 

Therapist: Okay, write that down on the right side, then put a big 
“BUT” next to it. Now, let’s think if there could be another explana¬ 
tion for why you might not have understood the concept other than 
that you’re incompetent. 

PATIENT: Well, it was the hrst time she talked about it. And it wasn’t in 
the readings. 

Therapist: Good. Now might you be able to understand it after she 
has reviewed it, or you’ve read something about it, or asked some¬ 
one else to explain it better? 

Patient: Probably. 

Therapist: Okay. Now next to the “BUT” you’ll write what we call the 
“reframe”—another, more helpful way of looking at the evidence. 
What could you say here? 





244 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

PATIENT: I guess I could say, “But I hadn’t read about it, and I’ll prob¬ 
ably understand it later.” 

Therapist: Okay, write that down ... Now let’s see if we can make the 
reframe even stronger. Would you agree that not understanding 
a concept at worst means a person has an incompetency, not that 
she’s completely incompetent as a person? 

PATIENT: Yes, that’s true. 

Therapist: Is it possible that many competent people don’t necessarily 
grasp concepts at the hrst presentation? 

Patient: True. 

Therapist: I wonder, is it possible that it was actually an incompetency 
of the professor, because if she had explained it more clearly, you 
might have understood it? 

PATIENT: That’s possible. 

Therapist: Why don’t you take a minute and see if there is anything 
else you want to add in writing?... Okay, let’s try the left side now. 
What evidence do you have from today that you are competent at 
many things? I’ll warn you, this can be hard if your screen is oper¬ 
ating. 

PATIENT: Well, I worked on my literature paper. 

Therapist: Good. Write that down. What else? 

Patient: I asked a question in my statistics course. 

Therapist: You did! Good. What else? 

Patient: {No response.) 

Therapist: How about the fact that you seem to grasp how to do this 
worksheet? 

PATIENT: I guess so. 

Therapist: Okay, how about for homework if you try to add to this 
sheet every day? Can you see that to start, doing the hrst part of the 
right side will be easiest, but the second part and the left side will 
probably be harder? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: So do what you can. It may be that we’ll have to work 
together to do the reframes and look for positive evidence. I’ll give 
you a clue, though. If you have trouble with these two parts, pre¬ 
tend someone else, your roommate, for example, has done exactly 
what you’ve done, and see how you’d view her actions. Okay? 

Patient: Sure. 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


245 


Therapist: Can you think of anything that might get in the way of 
your doing this assignment this week? 

Patient: No, I’ll try it. 

Therapist: Good. 

Had Sally displayed difficulty in identifying positive data during the 
session, I might have postponed this homework assignment, trying dif¬ 
ferent techniques in session hrst to help her successfully elicit items for 
the left side. For example, I might use a contrasting technique: 

Therapist: How about the fact that you battled your way through the 
student health system so you would get seen right away? Doesn’t 
that belong on the left side? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. I was just so mad; it was easy. 

Therapist: Wait a minute. If you hadn’t asserted yourself, wouldn’t you 
have put that on the right side as a sign of incompetence? 

Patient: Probably. 

Therapist: So think of it this way: Anything that you would criticize 
yourself for or put on the right side if you didn’t do it probably 
belongs on the left. 

Other ways of having patients recognize positive data that belong 
on the left side of the worksheet include asking patients: 


1. To think of data that they would say were positive evidence for 
another person: “Sally, can you think of someone else who you 
consider is competent in most ways? Who would that be? What 
have you done today that you would say shows that [this person] is 
competent if she or he had done it?’’ 

2. To name another person who would say the data indicate positive 
evidence about the patient: “Sally, who’s someone you think 
knows you pretty well, whose judgment you trust? What would 
[this person] say you had done today that’s evidence you’re 
competent?” or “Sally, what have you done today that / probably 
think indicates you’re competent?” 

3. To reflect on whether they would discount specific positive 
evidence if they compared what they did to a hypothetical negative 
model: “Sally, you don’t believe that finishing that brief paper is a 
sign of competence. But would a truly incompetent person have 





246 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

been able to write it? Would a truly incompetent person even have 
made it to where you are now?” 

4. To rate the strength of their beliefs at the intellectual and 

emotional levels at the beginning of each session, before setting 
the agenda. Then you can ask, “When you believed least strongly 
that you were incompetent or most strongly that you were 
competent, what was going on? Is this something we should 
put on the agenda?” Discussing these (more positive) situations 
provides an opportunity to gather or reinforce evidence for the left 
side. 


You may also take the opportunity throughout the session to ques¬ 
tion patients about the applicability of the CBW to the topic at hand. 

Therapist: Sally, can you summarize what we’ve just been talking 
about? 

PATIENT: Well, I was pretty down because I didn’t get the summer job I 
wanted, and where anyone would probably be disappointed, I got 
pretty depressed because I was thinking it meant that I was incom¬ 
petent. 

Therapist: Good. Can you see how this is relevant to the Core Belief 
Worksheet? 

PATIENT: Yes. It’s the same idea. 

Therapist: How can you write it down on the worksheet? 

PATIENT: I guess it goes on the right side ... I didn’t get the research 
assistant job ... but that doesn’t mean I’m completely incompetent. 
A lot of people applied for it, some with lots more experience than 
me. 


Using Extreme Contrasts to Modify Core Beiiefs 

At times, it is helpful for patients to compare themselves with someone, 
either real or imagined, who is at a negative extreme of the quality 
related to their core belief. You suggest that patients imagine someone 
within their frame of reference. (This technique is similar to the cogni¬ 
tive continuum described in Chapter 13.) 

Therapist: I wonder, do you know anyone at your school who truly is 
incompetent or at least behaves very incompetently? 

PATIENT: Ummm ... There is one guy in my dorm who never, I think. 





Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


247 


goes to classes or does work. He just seems to party all the time. I 
think he’s failing. 

Therapist: Okay, so compared to him, how incompetent are you? 
Patient: {Pauses.) Not very. 

Therapist: If you truly were an incompetent person, through and 
through, what would you be doing differently? 

PATIENT: ... I guess I’d drop out of college, sit around all day ... not 
support myself ... not do anything worthwhile ... not have any 
friends ... 

Therapist: How close are you to that now? 

Patient: Not at all, I guess. 

Therapist: So how accurate would you say it is to label yourself as truly 
incompetent? 

PATIENT: I guess it’s really not accurate. 

Using Stories, Movies, and Metaphors 

You can help patients develop a different idea about themselves by 
encouraging them to reflect on their view of characters or people who 
share the same negative core belief. When patients experience vivid 
examples of the invalidity of others’ very strongly held core beliefs, they 
begin to understand how they, too, could have a very strong core belief 
that is not accurate. 

One patient was sure that she was bad because as a child, and later 
as an adult, her mother had been physically and emotionally abusive 
to her, often telling the patient how bad she was. It was helpful for this 
patient to reflect on the story of Cinderella, in which a wicked step¬ 
mother treats a child quite badly without the child’s being at fault. 

Historicai Tests of the Core Beiief 

When patients’ core beliefs stem from early experiences, it is often use¬ 
ful to have them examine how their belief originated and was main¬ 
tained through the years (Young, 1999). You elicit and help patients 
reframe evidence that seemed to support the core belief from an early 
age, and also to uncover evidence that contradicted it. (You can use 
the CBW to collect data.) Usually, this process is initiated after patients 
have been monitoring the operation of their core belief in the present 
and have started the process of modifying it. First you provide a ratio¬ 
nale: 


248 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Sally, I’d like to see where this idea that you’re incompe¬ 
tent started. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Let’s pull out the Core Belief Worksheet. Do you rememher 
anything when you were quite young that made you helieve at the 
time that you were incompetent? Say, before elementary school? 
PATIENT: I rememher preschool. I rememher doing something with 
puzzles and the teacher yelling at me. I was crying ... 

Therapist: Were you slow to hnish it? 

Patient: Yes, something like that. 

Therapist: And you felt pretty incompetent? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: Okay, write that down on the right-hand side. We’ll hll in 
the reframes later. What else? 

PATIENT: I rememher this time my family went to the state park. Every¬ 
one else could ride their hikes around, hut I couldn’t keep up, and 
I got left really far behind. 

Either in session or for homework, patients continue this hrst step: 
recording memories that may have contributed to the establishment or 
maintenance of the core belief. They may reflect on preschool, elemen¬ 
tary school, high school, college, their 20s, and succeeding decades. The 
second step of the historical review involves searching for and recording 
evidence that supports the new, positive belief for each period. Having 
evoked more positive memories, patients are ready for the third step: 
reframing each piece of negative evidence, finally, in the fourth step, 
patients summarize each period. Eor example: 


High School Years—I did a lot of things competently, from sports to 
being responsible for a lot of things at home to doing well at school. 
It’s true that I didn’t get all A’s, and I wasn’t good at everything, and 
I felt Incompetent at times, but basically I was competent. 


Restructuring Early Memories 

Eor many Axis I patients, the “intellectual” techniques that have already 
been presented are sufficient to modify a core belief, as long as they 
are employed in the presence of emotion (i.e., that the core belief has 
been activated and the patient is experiencing negative affect). Eor oth¬ 
ers, special “emotional” or experiential techniques, in which patients’ 



Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


249 


affect is aroused, are also indicated. One such technique involves role- 
playing, reenacting an event to help patients reinterpret an earlier, 
traumatic experience. In the transcript that follows, I help a patient 
restructure the meaning of an earlier event related to a current distress¬ 
ing situation. 

Therapist: Annie, you look pretty down today. 

PATIENT: Yes. {crying) ... My hoss called me into his office this after¬ 
noon. He said I made a couple of typos in an e-mail I sent out for 
him, and that I have to he more careful and proofread my e-mails 
better. 

Therapist: What went through your mind when he said that? 

PATIENT: I’m a terrible secretary. I can’t do anything right. 

Therapist: How are you feeling? 

Patient: [expressing her emotion] Sad. Real sad. [expressing her core 
belief] And, you know, incompetent. 

Therapist: In proofreading some e-mails or overall? 

PATIENT: Overall, I’m completely incompetent. 

Therapist: [heightening her affect to facilitate memory retrieval] Do 
you feel this sadness and incompetency somewhere in your body? 
PATIENT: Behind my eyes. And my shoulders feel heavy. 

Instead of focusing on this current situation, I elicit a past experi¬ 
ence with the same theme. First we talk about it on the intellectual 
level. 

Therapist: When is the hrst time you remember feeling this way, as a 
kid? 

PATIENT: {pause) When I was 6. I was in hrst grade. I remember I 
brought home my report card, and I was a little scared because I 
hadn’t done very well. My dad was okay about it, but my mom got 
pretty mad. 

Therapist: What did she say? 

Patient: She yelled, “Annie, what am I going to do with you? Just look 
at this report card!” 

Therapist: What did you say? 

Patient: I don’t think I said anything. My mom kept saying, “Don’t you 
know what will happen if you don’t get good grades? Your brother 
always does well. Why can’t you? I’m so ashamed of you. What are 
you going to amount to?” 

Therapist: [empathizing] You must have felt pretty bad. 


250 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Patient: I did. 

Therapist: Do you think this was a reasonable way for her to act? 

Patient: (Thinks.) No ... I guess not. 

Therapist: Well, is this something you’d say to your own kids some 
day? 

PATIENT: No. Td never say that. 

Therapist: What would you say if you had a 6-year-old daughter who 
brought home a report card like that? 

PATIENT: Ummm ... I guess I’d say what my father did, “That’s okay. 
Don’t feel bad. I didn’t do great in school either, and it didn’t mat¬ 
ter one bit.” 

Therapist: That’s good. Do you have any idea why your mother didn’t 
say that? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: I wonder, from what you’ve told me before, if it could be 
because she thought other people might look down on her if her 
kids didn’t do well. 

PATIENT: That’s probably right. She was always bragging about my 
brother to her friends. I think she was always trying to keep up 
with the Joneses. 

Next I change the focus of our discussion so the patient can engage 

in experiential learning: 

Therapist: Okay, how about if we do a role play. I’ll play you at age 
6; you play your mom. Try to see things from her point of view as 
much as you can. I’ll start... Mom, here’s my report card. 

PATIENT: Annie, Tm ashamed of you. Look at these grades. What am I 
going to do with you? 

Therapist: Mom, I’m only 6. My grades aren’t great like Robert’s, but 
they’re okay. 

PATIENT: Don’tyou knowwhat will happen if you don’t get good grades? 
You’ll never amount to anything. 

Therapist: That’s silly. Mom. I’m only 6. 

PATIENT: But next year, you will be 7, and after that 8 ... 

Therapist: Mom, I didn’t do that bad. Why are you making such a big 
deal? You’re making me feel like I’m completely incompetent. Is 
that what you mean to do? 

PATIENT: No, of course not. I don’t want you to think that. It’s not true. 
I just want you to do better. 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


251 


Next I help the patient draw a different conclusion about the expe¬ 
rience: 

Therapist: Okay, out of role. What do you think? 

Patient: I wasn’t really incompetent. I did okay. Mom probably was 
hard on me because she didn’t want to be criticized. 

Therapist: How much do you believe that? 

Patient: I think I do believe it. 

Therapist: How about if we do the role play again, but this time we’ll 
switch parts. Let’s see how well the 6-year-old Annie can talk back 
to her mother. 

Following this second role play, I ask Annie what she learned, and 
how this learning applies to the situation that upset her this week (get¬ 
ting criticized by her boss). 

Another technique uses imagery to restructure early memories in 
the presence of affect (J. S. Beck, 2005; Edwards, 1989; Layden, New¬ 
man, Freeman, & Morse, 1993; Smucker & Dancu, 1999; Young, Klosko, 
& Weishaar, 2006). This Gestalt type technique has been adapted spe¬ 
cifically to change core beliefs and is more often used with patients with 
personality disorders than with Axis I patients. In the following case 
example, I help a patient reexperience an early distressing event that 
seems to have contributed to the origin or maintenance of a key core 
belief. I do the following: 


1. Identify a specific situation that is currently quite distressing to 
the patient and seems linked to an important core belief. 

2. Heighten the patient’s affect by focusing on automatic thoughts, 
emotions, and somatic sensations linked with this situation. 

3. Help the patient identify and reexperience a relevant early 
experience. 

4. Talk to the “younger” part of the patient to identify automatic 
thoughts, emotions, and beliefs. 

5. Help the patient develop a different understanding of the 
experience through guided imagery, Socratic questioning, 
dialogue, and/or role play. 


In the following transcript, Annie reports an upsetting experi¬ 
ence from the previous day in which she felt criticized by women in her 
church group with whom she was working on a fundraising project. 



252 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Can you imagine this scene again, as if it’s happening right 
now? You’re all sitting around the table ... {I have Annie vividly pic¬ 
ture and describe the distressing incident in the present tense.) 

PATIENT: Peggy is saying, “Annie, you’ve got to go back to the stores and 
hnd out who the managers or owners are and talk to them about 
contributing—the clerks don’t have the authority.” And I’m feeling 
so down, so sad. [I’m thinking] “I’m letting everyone down. I’m not 
good enough. I can’t do anything right.” 

Therapist: Are you feeling the sadness right now? 

Patient: (Nods.) 

Therapist: [questioning her about her physiological response to 
heighten her affective response] Where in your body do you feel 
it? 

PATIENT: Behind my eyes. 

Therapist: Anywhere else? Where else is the sadness? 

PATIENT: In my chest... and my stomach. There’s a heaviness. 

Therapist: Okay, can you focus on the heaviness? Can you really feel it 
now, in your stomach, in your chest? And behind your eyes? 
Patient: (Nods.) 

Therapist: Okay, just focus on your eyes, your stomach, your chest... 
{Waits about 10 seconds.) Annie, when do you remember feeling this 
heaviness before, when you were a kid? When’s the first time you 
remember feeling like this? 

In the next section, I have Annie relate a distressing, signihcant 
memory with the same theme as the current upsetting experience. 
Annie describes (in the past tense) how critical her mother was when 
Annie stayed up late to do a homework assignment in second grade and 
how incompetent she felt. I then ask Annie to relate this experience 
again, this time telling it to me as her younger self, as if experience is 
happening right now. I interview the “child” part of Annie, continually 
reinforcing the emotional immediacy of the experience by having the 
patient use the present tense throughout. 

Therapist: Seven-year-old Annie, where are you? 

PATIENT: I’m home. In the kitchen. I’m doing my homework. 
Therapist: Is it hard? 

Patient: Yes. I don’t know what to do. 

Therapist: [asking questions to deepen the experience, affect, and 
cognitions] Can you see your mom come into the kitchen? How 
does she look? 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


253 


PATIENT: She looks mad. Really mad. 

Therapist: How can you tell? 

Patient: {Eyes begin to tear.) Her face is scrunched up. It’s all red. 
Therapist: What is she saying to you? 

Patient: “Annie, go to hed.” 

Therapist: Keep going. 

Patient: “Mom, I can’t. I have to hnish this.” 

Therapist: What is Mom saying? 

Patient: “Get to hed! What’s the matter with you? This stuff is easy. 
Are you stupid?” {Sobs.) 

Therapist: {gently) Seven-year-old Annie, how are you feeling? 
PATIENT: Sad. {Cries a little.) 

Therapist: Real sad? 

Patient: {Nods.) 

Therapist: {softly) Seven-year-old Annie, what’s going through your 
mind right now? 

PATIENT: I am stupid. I can’t do anything right. 

Therapist: How much do you helieve that? {gesturing with her hands) A 
little? A medium amount? A whole lot? 

Patient: A whole lot. 

Therapist: What else are you thinking? 

Patient: I’ll never he ahle to do stuff right. 

Note that the intensihcation of Annie’s affect verihes this as a core issue. 
In the next section, I help Annie reinterpret this experience. 

Therapist: Seven-year-old Annie, I’d like to help you see this in a dif¬ 
ferent way. Is it okay if we get your older self to come talk to you? 
Patient: {Nods.) 

Therapist: Okay, 7-year-old Annie, can you imagine that your mom 
walks out of the kitchen and your 45-year-old self walks in? Where 
would you like her to he? 

PATIENT: Next to me, I guess. 

Therapist: Real close? 

Patient: {Nods.) 

Therapist: Would you like her to put her arm around you? 

Patient: {Nods.) 


254 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: Okay. Let’s have older Annie talk to 7-year-old Annie. Have 
her ask 7-year-old Annie what’s wrong. 

PATIENT: What’s wrong? 

Therapist: What does 7-year-old Annie say? 

Patient: I feel so stupid. I can’t do anything right. 

Therapist: What does your older self answer back? 

Patient: No, you’re not. This homework is too hard. It’s not your fault. 
You’re not stupid. 

Therapist: What does 7-year-old Annie say? 

Patient: But I should be able to do it. 

Therapist: Have your older self keep talking to her. 

Patient: No, that’s not true. You shouldn’t be able to do it. You’ve been 
absent. You were never taught this. Actually, it’s your teacher’s fault 
for giving you something too hard. 

Therapist: Seven-year-old Annie, do you believe her? 

Patient: A little. 

Therapist: Seven-year old Annie, what do you want to ask your older 
self? 

PATIENT: Why does everything have to be so hard? Why can’t I do any¬ 
thing right? 

Therapist: What does older Annie say? 

PATIENT: You do lots of things right. Some things like math papers are 
easy, and getting dressed all by yourself and playing soccer ... 
Therapist: Seven-year-old Annie, what are you thinking? 

PATIENT: But I can’t play soccer well. Robert is so much better. 
Therapist: Older Annie, help her understand. 

PATIENT: Listen, he is better at baseball than you. But he’s older. When 
he was your age, he could only do what you can do now. You’ll get 
better, just wait. 

Therapist: Seven-year-old Annie, how are you feeling now? 

When Annie reports that her younger self is feeling signihcantly less 
sad, I wrap up the exercise (e.g., “Is there anything else you want to ask 
your older self, 7-year-old Annie?”). I then ask Annie to write down the 
old belief that was activated in this memory and the new belief, and to 
rate how much she now believes each one at an intellectual level and at 
an emotional level. 

Then we discuss the present distressing incident involving her 
friend Peggy and the church group, and help Annie draw a more real- 


Identifying and Modifying Core Beliefs 


255 


ity-based, adaptive conclusion. By the end of the session, Annie helieves 
only 20% that she is incompetent and 70% that she is competent. She 
believes an alternative explanation quite strongly: that her contribution 
may not live up to Peggy’s expectations, but that does not mean that she 
is incompetent. This was her first experience with fundraising, and the 
more experienced members had not given her enough information. 
Even if someone else in the group could have done a better job, it does 
not mean that Annie is completely incompetent as a person. 

In summary, core beliefs require consistent, systematic work. A 
number of techniques applicable to restructuring automatic thoughts 
and intermediate beliefs may be used along with more specialized tech¬ 
niques oriented specifically toward core beliefs. Additional strategies 
to modify core beliefs can be found in J. S. Beck (2005), Beck and col¬ 
leagues (2004), and Young (1999). Typical core beliefs of patients with 
a variety of psychiatric disorders are described in Riso, du Toit, Stein, 
and Young (2007). 


Chapter 15 

^30 


ADDITIONAL COGNITIVE 
AND BEHAVIORAL TECHNIQUES 


A number of cognitive and behavioral techniques have previously 
been introduced, among them Socratic questioning, behavioral 
experiments, intellectual-emotional role-playing. Core Belief Work¬ 
sheets, imagery, and listing advantages and disadvantages of beliefs. 
This chapter describes other important techniques, many of which 
are both cognitive and behavioral in nature. As described more fully 
in Chapter 19, you will choose techniques according to your overall 
conceptualization and goals for a particular session. You will also cre¬ 
ate your own techniques as you become more proficient as a cognitive 
behavior therapist. 

The techniques described in this chapter, as is the case for all cog¬ 
nitive behavior therapy techniques, aim to influence the patient’s think¬ 
ing, behavior, mood, and physiological arousal. They include problem 
solving, making decisions, refocusing, relaxation and mindfulness, 
coping cards, graded task assignments, exposure, role play, the “pie” 
technique, self-comparisons, and credit lists. Additional techniques are 
described in various sources (Beck et ah, 1979; Beck & Emery, 1985; 
Leahy, 2003; McMullin, 1986). 


PROBLEM SOLVING AND SKILLS TRAINING 

Associated with or in addition to their psychological disorders, patients 
have real-life problems. At every session, you will encourage patients to 


256 


Additional Techniques 


257 


put on the agenda problems that have come up during the week that 
still distress them and problems they anticipate in the coming weeks. 
You will encourage patients to devise solutions to their problems, ask¬ 
ing them how they have solved similar problems in the past, or how they 
might advise a close friend or family member to solve the same kind of 
problem. You will then offer potential solutions, if needed. To spur your 
thinking, you might ask yourself how you have solved or would have 
solved a similar problem. 

Some patients are dehcient in problem-solving skills. They may 
beneht from direct instruction in problem solving, where they learn 
to specify a problem, devise solutions, select a solution, implement it, 
and evaluate its effectiveness (see, e.g., D’Zurilla & Nezu, 2006). And 
many patients also have skill dehcits. They require skills training from 
you or from an outside source in such areas as effective parenting, job 
interviewing, budgeting, and relationship skills. Self-help books can be 
useful; for example, McKay, Davis, and Fanning (2009) offer a client 
guide to improving communication. 

Other patients, however, already have good problem-solving and 
other skills. They may need help in testing dysfunctional beliefs that 
impede problem solving or using the skills they already possess. A prob¬ 
lem-solving worksheet (J. S. Beck, 2011) helps patients specify a prob¬ 
lem and identify and respond to interfering cognitions before discuss¬ 
ing potential solutions. 

Sally, for example, had difficulty concentrating when she was study¬ 
ing. She and 1 brainstormed solutions. She could start with the easiest 
assignment hrst, review relevant class notes before reading the text¬ 
book, write down questions when she was unsure of her understanding, 
and pause every few minutes to rehearse mentally what she had just 
read. We agreed she would try these strategies as experiments to see 
which, if any, facilitated her concentration and comprehension. 

A few sessions later, Sally put her volunteer job on the agenda. She 
had started tutoring a child at a nearby elementary school. Although 
the child was cooperative, Sally felt unsure of what she was doing. Intel¬ 
lectually she knew how to solve the problem; she realized she should 
contact the agency that coordinated the volunteers and/or the child’s 
teacher. Her belief that she should not ask for help, however, inhibited 
her. After evaluating her automatic thoughts and beliefs about this spe- 
cihc situation, Sally implemented the solution she herself had initially 
conceived. 

I used self-disclosure to help Sally when she brought up the prob¬ 
lem of procrastination. She was avoiding doing research for a paper she 
had to write. I told her that I often hnd the few moments or minutes 
just before starting a task I was avoiding the most unpleasant. Once I 
actually start doing the task, I invariably feel better. Sally recognized 


258 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


that she often had the same experience, and we set up a behavioral 
experiment to see what would happen later that afternoon when she 
went online to start her research. 

Some problem solving may involve significant life changes. After 
careful evaluation of a situation, you might encourage battered spouses 
to seek refuge or take legal action. If you have patients who are chroni¬ 
cally dissatisfied with their job, you might guide them in analyzing 
the advantages and disadvantages of staying in their current job ver¬ 
sus looking for another job. Not all problems, of course, can be ame¬ 
liorated. In such cases, however, patients may be able to change their 
response to problems by modifying their cognitions. They may need to 
accept the status quo and work on making other aspects of their lives 
more satisfying. 

Some patients are chronic worriers about problems that are highly 
unlikely to occur. For these patients, you may need to help them differ¬ 
entiate between low-probability and higher-probability problems and 
between taking reasonable and unreasonable precautions. You also 
need to help them accept uncertainty, recognize and build personal 
and external resources, and increase their sense of self-efficacy, so they 
will have more confidence that if problems do arise, they will be able 
(by themselves or with the help of others) to handle them. 


MAKING DECISIONS 

Many patients, especially those who are depressed, have difficulty mak¬ 
ing decisions. When patients want your help in this area, you will ask 
them to list the advantages and disadvantages of each option and then 
help them devise a system for weighing each item and drawing a conclu¬ 
sion about which option seems best (see Figure 15.1). 

Therapist: You mentioned that you wanted help in deciding whether 
to go to summer school or to get a job? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Okay. {Pulls out a piece of paper.) Let me show you how to 
weigh advantages and disadvantages. Have you ever done that? 

PATIENT: No. At least not in writing. I’ve been going over some of the 
pros and cons in my head. 

Therapist: Good. That’ll help us get started. I think you’ll find that 
writing them down will make the decision clearer. Which one do 
you want to start with—school or a job? 

PATIENT: Getting a job, I guess. 


Additional Techniques 


259 



A 

Advantages of job 

Disadvantages of job 

1. Make money. 

1. Have to find one. 

2. Maybe learn skills. 

2. Less tree time. 

3. Break from what I've been doing. 

3. Might not like it. 

4. Meet different people. 


5. Make me feel more productive. 


6. Good for resume. 


Advantages of summer school 

Disadvantages of summer school 

1. Two friends are going. 

1. Not making money and it costs 

2. Could take one less course in 

money. 

the fall. 

2. Doesn't increase my skills. 

3. Lots of free time. 

3. More of the same of what I’ve been 

4. It's a known quantity. 

doing. 

5. Could meet new people. 

4. Doesn't make me feel as productive. 

6. Easier to enroll than to find a job. 

5. Doesn't help my resume. 

V 

J 


FIGURE 15.1. Sally’s advantages-disadvantages analysis. 


Therapist: Okay. Write “Advantages ofjob” at the top left of this paper 
and “Disadvantages ofjob” on the top right, and “Advantages of 
summer school” and “Disadvantages of summer school” at the bot¬ 
tom. 

Patient: {Does so.) Okay. 

Therapist: What have you been thinking? Could you jot down some 
advantages and disadvantages of getting ajob? {Sally writes down the 
ideas she has had so far. I ask some questions to guide her.) How about the 
fact that you’d be doing something different—taking a break from 
schoolwork—is that an advantage? 

PATIENT: Yeah. {Writes it down.) 

Therapist: Would ajob cut into your vacation time? 

Patient: No, I’d only take ajob that would let me spend the last 2 
weeks of August with my family. 

Sally and I continue this process until she feels she has recorded both 
sides fairly and thoroughly. We repeat the process with the second 
option. Examining advantages and disadvantages of summer school 
reminds Sally of additional items to add to the “job” lists. Likewise, 
she also reviews the “job” items to see whether their counterparts are 
relevant to the “summer school” lists. 

Next, I help Sally evaluate the items: 



260 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Okay, this looks pretty complete. Now you need to weigh 
the items in some way. Do you want to circle the most important 
items—or rate the importance of each one on a 1-10 scale? 

PATIENT: Circle the items, 1 guess. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s look at the “job” lists. Which items are most 
important to you? {Sally circles items in each column in Figure 15.1.) 
Just looking over what you’ve circled, what do you think? 

PATIENT: I’d like to get ajob, because if 1 had one. I’d make money and 
feel productive, and it would be good to get a break from school. 
But it feels like it would be really hard to get one. 

Therapist: Should we spend a few minutes now talking about how you 
might go about looking for ajob? Then we can come back to this 
list and see if you’re still leaning that way. 

At the end of the discussion, 1 increase the probability that Sally 

will use this technique again: 

Therapist: Did you hnd this [process of listing and weighing advan¬ 
tages and disadvantages] useful? Can you think of any other deci¬ 
sions you might have to make where it would be good to do the 
same thing? How will you remember to do it this way? 


REFOCUSING 

As described in Chapter 11, it is often best for patients to evaluate their 
automatic thoughts on the spot and evaluate them or read relevant 
therapy notes. In some situations, however, this strategy is unfeasible or 
undesirable, and refocusing their attention is indicated. Refocusing is 
particularly useful when concentration is needed for the task at hand, 
such as completing a work assignment, carrying on a conversation, or 
driving. It is also useful when patients are having obsessive thoughts 
for which rational evaluation is ineffective. You will teach patients to 
label and accept their experience: “I’m just having automatic thoughts. 
1 can accept the fact that I’m having them and that I’m feeling badly 
and refocus on what 1 was doing.” Then patients should deliberately 
turn their attention to the report they are writing, to what their fellow 
conversationalists are saying, to the road ahead. You will rehearse the 
strategy with them, trying to elicit how they have refocused their atten¬ 
tion in the past or how they believe they could in the future. 

Therapist: Okay, so one alternative when you’re feeling anxious in 
class is to answer back those thoughts. But sometimes you may be 


Additional Techniques 


261 


better off just changing your focus to what’s going on in class. Have 
you done this before, made an effort to concentrate on the class? 
PATIENT: Ah ... yeah, I guess so. 

Therapist: How did you do that? 

Patient: Well, it helps if I start taking lots of notes. 

Therapist: Good. How about this week if you try not to let yourself just 
feel overwhelmed by your negative thoughts and anxiety and sad¬ 
ness, but instead either answer back your thoughts, or refocus and 
take lots of notes, or both. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: How will you remember to do that? 

At other times, patients may be too distressed to refocus their 
attention on a task, or may not have a specific task to which to attend. 
Distracting activities can be useful in these circumstances. While dis¬ 
traction is not the ultimate solution, it can be a helpful short-term tech¬ 
nique. Again, elicit what has worked for the patient in the past and then 
offer other suggestions, if needed. 

Therapist: So you got really worked up about the report you have to 
write? 

PATIENT: Yes, I couldn’t concentrate. I just got more and more anx¬ 
ious. 

Therapist: What did you do? 

Patient: I just started to pace around my room. 

Therapist: Did that help? 

Patient: Not really. 

Therapist: Did you try to answer back your thoughts? 

PATIENT: I read my therapy notes, but they didn’t help. I didn’t believe 
them, I guess. 

Therapist: {Jots doivn a note.) Let’s try to figure out why they weren’t 
helpful in a few minutes, but first let me ask you, how long were you 
anxious? 

PATIENT: A long time. I don’t know, maybe a couple of hours. I kept 
going back to my desk to try to read, but I just couldn’t. 

Therapist: Did you try to distract yourself? 

PATIENT: No. I finally decided not to try and I just went to dinner. 
Therapist: Do you ever try to distract yourself? What have you done? 
PATIENT: Usually, I turn on the TV. 


262 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: How well does that usually work? 

Patient: Sometimes I can lose myself and feel better, sometimes not. 

Therapist: Okay, if it doesn’t work well, what else do you try? 

Patient: Sometimes I pick up the newspaper or do a crossword puzzle, 
but that doesn’t always work either. 

Therapist: Any other ideas? 

Patient: ... No, not really. 

Therapist: Can I mention some things that other people hnd helpful? 
You might try some of these things as an experiment this week: 
take a walk or go running, call or e-mail a friend or someone in 
your family, clean your closet or desk, balance your checkbook, go 
to the grocery store, knock on a neighbor’s door, play a video game, 
visit your favorite websites ... What do you think? Do you want to 
try any of these things this week? 

PATIENT: Yes. I could do that. 

Therapist: Sometimes people hnd that soothing activities are better: 
taking a long bath, listening to uplifting music, reading prayers. 
What do you think? Would you like to write down a few possibili¬ 
ties? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Once you’re feeling less distressed, you may be able to 
answer your thoughts better, or just return to what you were doing. 
Now, ultimately, we don’t want you to have to distract yourself. But 
it may help for now. 

On the other hand, you may hnd that patients are distracting 

themselves too much. If they do not fear negative emotion, the follow¬ 
ing type of discussion can be useful. 

Therapist: So, what you’re saying is that you tend to try to push your 
thoughts out of your mind when you’re feeling upset? Is that 
right? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: And do these thoughts, for example, that you can’t do 
something, vanish from your mind completely? 

PATIENT: No, they usually come back. 

Therapist: So you’re not really pushing them completely out of mind, 
just to the back of your mind, where they wait for another opportu¬ 
nity to pop out and make you miserable? 

PATIENT: I guess so. 


Additional Techniques 


263 


Therapist: I wonder this week if you would be willing, at least some 
of the time, to stop distracting yourself and instead really work on 
these thoughts, evaluate them as you’ve been learning to do in ses¬ 
sion? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Even if it’s impossible to do a Thought Record at the time, 
maybe you could do it as soon as you have a free moment. 

Patients may use distraction to avoid the experience of negative 
emotion. It is imperative for them to fully understand that they do not 
need to distract themselves because while feeling upset can feel pain¬ 
ful, it is not harmful. If patients consistently distract themselves, they 
cannot learn this important lesson, and you may need to set up behav¬ 
ioral experiments to test their fears about experiencing strong affect. It 
may be benehcial for you to teach them the AWARE technique on page 
197 (Beck & Emery, 1985), in which they are instructed to accept the 
anxiety, watch it, act with the anxiety, repeat these steps, and expect 
the best. 


MEASURING MOODS AND BEHAVIOR 
USING THE ACTIVITY CHART 

Eor some patients, it is helpful to use the activity chart, not to schedule 
activities, but to monitor their moods while engaged in various activi¬ 
ties, to look for patterns of occurrence. Eor example, a patient with an 
anxiety disorder might hll in the boxes listing activities and rating lev¬ 
els of anxiety 0-10 (or mild, moderate, severe). A patient who is chroni¬ 
cally irritated or angry might do likewise with an anger scale. Using 
such a scale is particularly useful for patients who either do not seem 
to notice small to moderate shifts in affect, or patients who chronically 
over- or underestimate degrees of emotion. 

Patients with a problematic behavior such as binge eating, smok¬ 
ing, overspending, gambling, substance use, or angry outbursts might 
record all their activities to investigate patterns of occurrence, or might 
just record the maladaptive behaviors themselves. 


RELAXATION AND MINDFULNESS 

Many patients beneht from learning relaxation techniques, described 
in detail elsewhere (Benson, 1975; Davis, Eshelman, & McKay, 2008; 
Jacobson, 1974). There are several kinds of relaxation exercises, includ- 


264 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


ing progressive muscle relaxation, imagery, and controlled breathing. 
Patients can obtain commercially produced relaxation tapes or you 
can follow a script and make a recording for them during the session. 
You should teach relaxation exercises in session, where you can deal 
with problems and assess efficacy. Be aware that some patients experi¬ 
ence a paradoxical arousal effect from relaxation exercises; they actu¬ 
ally become more tense and anxious (Barlow, 2002; Clark, 1989). As 
with all techniques, you will propose that patients try relaxation as an 
experiment; either it will help reduce anxiety or it will lead to anxious 
thoughts that can be evaluated. 

Mindfulness techniques help patients noryudgmentally observe 
and accept their internal experiences, without evaluating or trying to 
change them. A short summary of techniques, particularly for people 
with rumination, can be found in Leahy (2010). Mindfulness is cur¬ 
rently being integrated with cognitive behavior therapy for a number 
of problems, including psychiatric disorders, medical conditions, and 
stress (Chiesa & Serretti, 2010a, 2010b). For extended discussions of 
mindfulness, see Hayes and colleagues (2004); McCown, Reibel, and 
Micozzi (2010); Williams, Teasdale, Segal, and Kabat-Zinn (2007); and 
Kabat-Zinn (1990). 


GRADED TASK ASSIGNMENTS 

To reach a goal, it is usually necessary to accomplish a number of steps 
along the way. Patients tend to become overwhelmed when they focus 
on how far they are from a goal, instead of focusing on their current 
step. A graphic depiction of the steps is often reassuring (see Figure 
15.2). 

Therapist: Sally, it sounds like you get nervous just thinking about 
voluntarily talking in class, though it’s something you want to be 
able to do. 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: 1 wonder how we could break it down into steps; for exam¬ 
ple, could you start by just asking a question a/fer class, either to 
another student or to the professor? 

PATIENT: Yeah. 1 guess 1 could do that. 

Therapist: What could the next step be? {Guides Sally in identifying the 
steps presented in Figure 15.2.) 

Therapist: Does it still seem scary to think about talking in class? 
PATIENT: Yeah, some. 


Additional Techniques 


265 


Express an opinion 
in class 


Answer a question 
in class 


Ask a question 
in class 


Ask a professor 
a question 
after class 


Ask another student 
a question after 
class 


j 


FIGURE 15.2. Breaking down goals into steps. 


Therapist: (Draws a staircase.) Okay, here’s what you have to remem- 
her. You’re going to start down here, doing something that’s just 
a little hard, and you’ll get really comfortahle on this step before 
trying the next step, and so on. And remember, before you try the 
hnal step, you’ll have gotten really good at the step just below it. 
Okay? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: So every time you start thinking about the hnal goal, how 
about reminding yourself of this staircase and especially of the step 
you’re now on, and how you’re going to go up the staircase one step 
at a time. Do you think that’ll help bring down the anxiety? 


EXPOSURE 

Depressed and anxious patients often engage in avoidance, a coping 
strategy. They may feel hopeless about engaging in certain activities 
(“It won’t do any good to call my friends. They won’t want to see me”) 
or fearful (“If I [do this activity], something bad will happen”). The 














266 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


avoidance may be quite apparent (e.g., patients who spend a great deal 
of time in bed, avoiding self-care activities, household tasks, socializing, 
and errands.) Or the avoidance may be more subtle (e.g., socially anx¬ 
ious patients who avoid making eye contact, smiling at others, making 
small talk, and volunteering their opinions). These latter avoidances 
are safety behaviors (Salkovskis, 1996) that patients believe will ward off 
anxiety. While avoidance tends to bring immediate relief (and so is 
quite reinforcing), it perpetuates the problem. Patients do not get the 
opportunity to test their automatic thoughts and receive disconfirming 
data. 

When patients are anxious and significantly avoidant, you will pro¬ 
vide a strong rationale for exposing themselves to feared situations. 
Help them identify an activity that is associated with low to moderate 
discomfort and ask them to engage in this activity every day (or even 
several times a day, if feasible), until their anxiety has decreased signifi¬ 
cantly. Then identify a new situation that is just a little more difficult, 
and encourage frequent exposure until they can do it with relative ease, 
and so on. 

You may discuss various coping techniques to use before, during, 
and after each task: Thought Records, coping cards, or relaxation exer¬ 
cises, for example. For particularly avoidant patients, covert rehearsal 
(pages 303-305) to identify either dysphoric automatic thoughts or 
excuses not to do an assignment is useful. In addition, you may find 
that patients are more likely to do daily work on a graded exposure 
hierarchy if you ask them to fill out a daily monitor, which can be sim¬ 
ple, listing just the date, activity, and level of anxiety, or it can be more 
elaborate (see Figure 15.3). 

In a more elaborate monitor, you can also ask patients to record 
and then cross off predictions that did not come true, a task that further 
reminds them of the inaccuracy of many of their thoughts. Detailed 
descriptions of the process used to develop agoraphobic hierarchies 
can be found in various sources (e.g., Goldstein & Stainback, 1987). 


/ 


Predicted level 

Actual level 

\ 



of anxiety 

of anxiety 


Date 

Activity 

0-100 

1-100 

Predictions 

4/4 

Asking (Questions 

do 

50 

1 won’t be able to do it. 


in class 



Nothing will come out of 
my mouth. 

I’ll make a fool of myself 

V 




J 


FIGURE 15.3. Custom-made monitor. 








Additional Techniques 


267 


Dobson and Dobson (2009) describe plans for effective exposure ses¬ 
sions, possible targets, and factors that decrease the effectiveness of 
exposure. 


ROLE-PLAYING 

Role-playing is a technique that can be used for a wide variety of pur¬ 
poses. Descriptions of role-playing can be found throughout this vol¬ 
ume, including role-playing to uncover automatic thoughts, to develop 
an adaptive response, and to modify intermediate and core beliefs. 
Role-playing is also useful in learning and practicing social skills. 

Some patients have weak social skills in general, or are proficient 
at one style of communication but lack skills to adapt their style when 
needed. Sally, for example, is reasonably good at normal social conver¬ 
sation and situations that call for a caring, empathic stance. She is far 
less skilled, however, in situations in which assertion is appropriate. She 
and I engaged in a number of role plays to practice assertiveness. 

PATIENT: I don’t even know how I’d begin to talk to my professor. 
Therapist: Well, you want him to help you understand this concept 
better, right? What would you like to say? 

PATIENT: ... I don’t know. 

Therapist: Well, how about if we do a role play. I’ll be you; you play 
your professor. You can play him as being as unreasonable as you’d 
like. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: I’ll start: Uh, Professor X, could you explain this concept? 

PATIENT: {gruffly) I did that already last week in class. Weren’t you 
there? 

Therapist: Actually, I was. But I don’t understand it well enough yet. 
PATIENT: Well, you should go read the chapter in your textbook. 
Therapist: I’ve done that already. It didn’t help enough either. That’s 
why I’m here now. 

PATIENT: Okay, what don’t you understand about it? 

Therapist: I tried to think of a specific question before I came, but I 
couldn’t quite think of how to phrase it. Could you spend a couple 
of minutes just describing it, and then I can see if I can put it in my 
own words? 


268 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: You know, I don’t have much time now. Why don’t you see 
someone else in the class? 

Therapist: I’d rather get it straight from you. That’s why I came now 
during office hours. But if you’d rather, I could come back on 
Thursday when you have office hours again. 

PATIENT: This is a simple concept. You should really ask some other 
student. 

Therapist: I’ll try that hrst. If I need more help. I’ll come back Thurs¬ 
day ... Okay, out of role. Let’s review what I did and then we can 
switch roles. 

Before teaching patients social skills, you should assess the level of 
skill they already possess. Many patients know precisely what to do and 
say, but have difficulty using this knowledge because of dysfunctional 
assumptions (e.g., “If I express an opinion. I’ll get shot down”; “If I 
assert myself, the other person will be hurt/get mad/think I’m out of 
line”). One way of assessing skills is to have patients assume a positive 
outcome: “If you knew for sure the teaching assistant would be will¬ 
ing to talk to you, what would you say?” “If you really believed it was 
your right to get help, what would you say?” “If you knew the professor 
would back down and realize he was being unreasonable, what would 
you say?” 

Another indication that the problem is associated with dysfunc¬ 
tional beliefs rather than with a skill dehcit is the patient’s use of these 
skills in another context. Patients may be quite appropriately assertive at 
work, for example, but not with friends. In this case, you might not need 
to use role-playing to teach assertiveness skills (although you could use 
role-playing to have the patients identify their automatic thoughts while 
they are being assertive, or to predict thoughts and feelings of the other 
person when roles are switched). 


USING THE “PIE” TECHNIQUE 

It is often helpful to patients to see their ideas in graphic form. A pie 
chart can be used in many ways, for instance, helping patients set goals 
or determining relative responsibility for a given outcome, both of 
which are illustrated below (see Figure 15.4). 


Setting Goals 

When patients have difficulty specifying their problems and the changes 
they would like to make in their lives, or when they lack insight into how 


Additional Techniques 


269 



FIGURE 15.4. Use of pie charts in setting goals. 


imbalanced their lives are, they may benefit from a graphic depiction of 

their ideal versus actual expenditure of time. 

Therapist: It sounds as if you know your life isn’t quite in balance, but 
you don’t know what to change—is that right? 

PATIENT: Yes, I guess so. 

Therapist: How about we draw a pie diagram to help figure it out? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: First, we’ll create a diagram of your life now, then an ideal 
one. Think about how much time you are actually spending in 
these areas: 


Work 

Taking care of your physical self 

Friends 

Taking care of your household 

Fun 

Taking care of your spiritual/ 

Family 

cultural/intellecfual side 

Other interests 



Therapist: Can you draw a pie and put in divisions to give me a rough 
idea of how you’re spending your time now? 

Patient: {Does so.) 














270 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Okay, next, what would you change about it in an ideal 
world? 

PATIENT: Well... I guess I’d work less, probably try to have more fun ... 
spend more time with friends, exercise more, read more, things 
like that. 

Therapist: Good. How would that look on this ideal pie? 

Patient: {Fills in “ideal” pie.) [expressing an automatic thought] But 
Tm afraid if I spend less time working. I’ll accomplish even less 
than I am now. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s write down that prediction. Now, you may be 
right, in which case you could always go back to the amount of work 
you’re doing now. Or you may be wrong. It’s possible if you work a 
little less and do more pleasurable things, your mood will improve. 
If your mood improves, is it possible that you might concentrate 
better and work more efficiently? What do you think? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: In any case, we can test your prediction and see what hap¬ 
pens. 

PATIENT: I know for a fact that I’m not working too efficiently right 
now. 

Therapist: Then it may well be that once we get your life back in bal¬ 
ance and you’re getting positive inputs from doing things you like, 
that you’ll be able to do better with less work. 

Following a discussion such as this, you would work with patients 

to set specihc goals to move their expenditure of time closer to their 

ideal. 

Determining Responsibiiity 

Another technique allows the patient to see graphically the possible 

causes for a given outcome (see Figure 15.5). 

Therapist: Sally, how much do you believe you got a C on your exam 
because you’re basically incompetent? 

Patient: Oh, close to 100%. 

Therapist: I wonder if there might be any other reasons? 

PATIENT: ... Well, there were some things on it that we had never really 
covered in class. 

Therapist: Okay, anything else? 


Additional Techniques 


271 


PATIENT: I missed two classes, so I had to borrow notes, and Lisa’s notes 
weren’t that good. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: I don’t know. I studied some things a lot that turned out not 
to be on the exam. 

Therapist: Sounds like you weren’t very lucky in that regard. 

PATIENT: No, and I hardly studied other things that were on the exam. 
I guessed wrong. 

Therapist: Any other reason to explain why you didn’t do as well as 
you would have liked? 

PATIENT: Hmmm. Can’t think of any. 

Therapist: Did everyone else do pretty well? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: Would you say it was a hard test? 

Patient: Yeah, too hard. 

Therapist: Would you say the professor had done a really good job of 
explaining the material? 

PATIENT: No. I don’t think he did a great job. I had to rely on the read¬ 
ings, mostly. A couple of times, I heard people saying that they 
hadn’t been able to follow what he was talking about. 

Therapist: I wonder if you also might have trouble concentrating 
because of your depression and anxiety? 

Patient: Definitely. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s see how all this would look graphically. Here’s a 
pie chart; let’s have you divide up sections to explain why you got a 
C on the exam, including (1) the professor didn’t teach that great; 
(2) the test was really hard; (3) you hadn’t guessed right about 
which material to study; (4) you borrowed class notes that weren’t 
great; (5) there was material on the exam that wasn’t even covered 
in class; (6) your depression and anxiety interfered with your con¬ 
centration; and (7) at heart, you’re an incompetent person. 

PATIENT: {Fills in pie diagram [Figure 15.5].) 

Therapist: Looks like you divided up the sections pretty evenly. How 
much do you believe now that you got a C on the exam because 
you’re an incompetent person? 

Patient: Less. 50%, maybe. 

Therapist: Good. That’s quite a drop. 


272 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 



FIGURE 15.5. Pie chart for causality. 


When investigating the contribution of alternative explanations, 
ask patients to estimate the dysfunctional attribution (in this case, “I’m 
incompetent”) last so they will more fully consider all explanations. 


SELF-COMPARISONS AND CREDIT LISTS 

Patients with psychiatric disorders have a negative bias in information 
processing, especially when evaluating themselves. They tend to notice 
data that could be construed as negative and to ignore, discount, or 
even forget information that is positive. In addition, they often make 
dysfunctional comparisons: They compare themselves at present with 
how they were before the onset of their disorder, or with how they would 
like to be, or they compare themselves with others who do not have a 
psychiatric disorder. This negative attentional bias helps to maintain or 
increase their dysphoria. 

Changing the Self-Comparison 

In the following transcript, I help Sally see that her selective negative 
attention and comparisons are dysfunctional. I then teach her to make 
more functional comparisons (with herself at her worst point) and to 
keep a credit list. 








Additional Techniques 


273 


Therapist: Sally, it sounds as if you’re pretty down on yourself. Do you 
think there’s anything you did this week that you deserve credit 
for? 

PATIENT: Well, I did hnish my lit paper. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: Ummm ... can’t think of anything. 

Therapist: I wonder whether you might not have noticed some 
things. 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: For instance, how many classes did you go to? 

Patient: All of them. 

Therapist: In how many did you take notes? 

Patient: All of them. 

Therapist: Was that easy to do? Or did you have to push yourself to go 
and concentrate? 

PATIENT: It was hard. But I should have been able to do it easily. No one 
else probably had to push. 

Therapist: Oh ... Sounds as if you might be comparing yourself with 
other people again. Do you do that a lot? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I guess so. 

Therapist: Does that seem like a fair comparison to you? Would you 
be as hard on yourself, for example, if you had to push yourself to 
go to class and concentrate if you had pneumonia? 

PATIENT: No, I’d have a legitimate reason to be tired. 

Therapist: Exactly. I wonder if you have a legitimate reason to be tired 
now? Maybe you do deserve credit when you push yourself. Do you 
remember at the hrst session when we talked about the symptoms 
of depression: tiredness, low energy, trouble concentrating, distur¬ 
bances in sleep and appetite, and so on? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: So maybe you do deserve credit for pushing ahead, given 
that you are depressed? 

PATIENT: I hadn’t thought of it that way. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s go over two things now: what to do when you 
compare yourself with others, and how to keep track of what you 
deserve credit for. Okay, what happens to your mood when you 
compare yourself to others, for example, when you think, “No one 
else has to push to go to class and take notes?” 

PATIENT: I feel pretty bad. 


274 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: And what would happen if you said to yourself, “Now wait 
a minute. That’s not a reasonable comparison. Let me compare 
myself to me at my worst point, when I was in my room a lot and 
couldn’t concentrate in class.” 

PATIENT: Well, Td realize that I’m doing more now. 

Therapist: And would your mood get worse? 

Patient: No, probably better. 

Therapist: Would you like to try this comparison for homework? 
Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s have you write this down on your assignment 
sheet, “Catch myself when I compare myself to nondepressed peo¬ 
ple. Then remind myself this isn’t reasonable, and compare myself 
to me at my worst point instead.” 

Patients may also have automatic thoughts in which they compare 
themselves at present to where they would like to be (e.g., “I should be 
able to read this chapter easily”), or to where they were before they 
became depressed (e.g., “This used to be so easy for me”). In this case, 
help them focus on how far they have progressed since their worst 
point, rather than on far they are from their best point or on how far 
they have to go. 

When patients are at their lowest point, you will modify the 
approach: 

Therapist: It sounds as if you feel pretty down when you compare 
yourself with other people, or with how you wish you were. I won¬ 
der if it might be helpful at these times to remind yourself that you 
have a goal list, and that together we’re developing a plan to help 
you make changes. If you reminded yourself that you and I are a 
team working to get you to where you want to be, what could hap¬ 
pen to your mood? 

Credit Lists 

Credit lists are simply daily lists (mental or written) of positive things 
the patient is doing or items she deserves credit for (see Figure 15.6). As 
with all assignments, I hrst explain the rationale: 

Therapist: Sally, I’d like to describe a homework assignment that I 
think could help. You know, we’ve talked about how you have lots 
and lots of self-critical thoughts. And what happens to your mood 
every time you have a thought like, “I should be doing this better,” 
or “I did a lousyjob on that”? 


Additional Techniques 


275 


/■ N 

(Things that I did that were positive or were a iittie hard 
but i did them anyway) 

1. Tried to foiiow what was said in statistics ciass. 

2. Finished paper and e-maiied it to [the professor], 

3. Taiked to Juiie at iunch. 

4. Caiied Jeremy to confirm chemistry assignment. 

5. Went for a run instead of taking a nap. 

6. Read Chapter 5 of econ book. 

V_^_y 


FIGURE 15.6. Sally’s credit list. 


PATIENT: I feel worse. 

Therapist: Right. And what would happen, do you think, if you started 
noticing more good things you’re doing? 

PATIENT: I’d probably feel better. 

Therapist: Okay, now would you say that it would be reasonable for 
me to give myself credit if I were tired from either pneumonia or 
depression, but I pushed ahead anyway and got out of bed and 
came to work and saw my patients and wrote e-mails and so on? 

Patient: Sure. 

Therapist: Even if I didn’t do these things as well as usual? 

Patient: Well, sure. 

Therapist: Because I suppose I could have stayed in bed and pulled 
the covers over my head instead. 

Patient: Right. 

Therapist: Now, does that same thing apply to you? Do you deserve 
credit for pushing ahead? 

Patient: I guess so. 

Therapist: You know, it’s probably hard for you to remember to give 
yourself credit outside of our session. That’s why I’m suggesting 
you keep a written list of things you deserve credit for. What do you 
think? 

PATIENT: I could try it. 

Therapist: {beginning the assignment in session) Here, let’s start it now, 
if that’s okay with you. What do you want to call it—“credit list”? 
Something else? 



276 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 
PATIENT: Credit list is fine. 

Therapist: Good. Now on this list you can either just write positive 
things you’ve done, or you can think to yourself, “What did I do 
today that was even a little hard, but I did it anyway?” 

PATIENT: Okay. {Writes doivn instructions.) 

Therapist: Let’s start with today. What have you already done today? 

Patient: {Writes as she speaks.) Let’s see, I went to my statistics class ... 
it was kind of hard to follow, but I tried ... I hnished my paper and 
e-mailed it to the professor ... I talked to my roommate’s friend, 
who had lunch with us ... 

Therapist: That’s a good start. How do you feel about doing this every 
day? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: I think that you’ll remember things ten times better if you 
write them down immediately. But if you can’t, you might at least 
try to write things down at lunch, dinner, and before bed. Think 
you can do that? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Do you think you need to write down why you’re doing this 
assignment? 

PATIENT: No, I’ll remember. It makes me focus on good things, and 
that makes me feel better. 

Completing credit lists early in treatment also helps prepare patients 
for the later task of uncovering positive data for the Core Belief Work¬ 
sheet (Chapter 11). 

In summary, there are many cognitive and behavioral techniques; 
this volume describes some of the most common. Readers are encour¬ 
aged to do additional reading to add to their repertoire. 


Chapter 16 

IMAGERY 


M any patients experience automatic thoughts not only as unspoken 
words in their mind, but also in the form of mental pictures or 
images (Beck & Emery, 1985). Sally had the thought “[My classmate] 
will think I’m imposing on him if I ask [for a copy of his notes]Upon 
questioning, I determined that when Sally experienced this thought, 
she simultaneously envisioned her classmate with an irritated look on 
his face. This image was an imaginal automatic thought. 

This chapter demonstrates how to teach patients to identify their 
spontaneous images and how to intervene therapeutically with both 
spontaneous and induced images. Although many patients have visual 
images, few report them. Merely asking about images, even repeatedly, 
sometimes is not sufficient to elicit them. Images usually are quite brief 
and are often upsetting; many patients push them out of mind quite 
quickly. Failure to identify and respond to upsetting images may result 
in continued distress for the patient. 


IDENTIFYING IMAGES 

You will need to be alert to the possibility of patients’ thoughts occur¬ 
ring in imaginal form, because few patients spontaneously report 
images and some have difficulty identifying them even when prompted. 
In the following transcript, I try to ascertain whether Sally has had a 
spontaneous image simultaneous with a verbal automatic thought. 


277 


278 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Therapist: So you had the thought “I won’t be able to handle a part- 
time job,” and you felt sad? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: I wonder, when you had that thought, did you get a picture 
in your head? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure what you mean. 

Therapist: Did “not handling” a job look like something? 

PATIENT: I guess I pictured myself walking back to my dorm late at 
night, just feeling overwhelmed and kind of burdened. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: I was walking really slowly, just feeling exhausted, with a really 
heavy backpack. 

Therapist: Okay. That picture, or imagining, is what we call an 
image. 

At times, patients fail to grasp the concept when the therapist only 
uses the word “image.” Synonyms include mental picture, daydream, 
fantasy, imagining, and memory. Had Sally failed to report an image, 
I might have tried using one of these different words. Or I might have 
chosen to help her create an image (if a therapeutic goal for that ses¬ 
sion was to help her recognize images). I could have induced a neu¬ 
tral or positive image (“Describe for me what the outside of your home 
looks like,” or “Imagine you’re walking into this building. What do you 
see?”). Or I might have tried to induce an image about a distressing 
situation, as below: 

Therapist: Did you imagine what your professor might look like when 
you asked him for help? Did he look happy? 

PATIENT: I don’t think I pictured what he looked like. 

Therapist: [helping Sally to think very specihcally] Could you pic¬ 
ture it now? Can you imagine going up to him? When would you 
approach him, anyway? 

PATIENT: Oh, probably on Tuesday. That’s when he has office hours. 
Therapist: So he’d be in his office? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: What building is he in? 

Patient: Bennett Hall. 

Therapist: Okay, can you picture it now? It’s Tuesday, you’re coming 
up to Bennett Hall... You’re coming to his office ... Can you see it 
in your mind? Is the door open or closed? 


Imagery 


279 


Patient: Closed. 

Therapist: Okay, can you see yourself knocking on the door? What 
does he say when he hears your knock? 

PATIENT: He says, “Come in.” {Imitates professor’s gruff voice.) 

Therapist: Okay, can you see yourself go in? What does his face look 
like? 

PATIENT: He’s scowling. 

Therapist: And then what happens? {Sally and Ifollow the image out to its 
most distressing point.) Okay, this scene you’ve just visualized is what 
we call an “image.” Do you think you might have had an image like 
this when you were considering going to see him this week? 

PATIENT: Maybe ... I’m not sure. 

Therapist: How about for homework if you look for images when 
you realize you’re getting upset, along with looking for automatic 
thoughts? 

Patient: Okay. 


EDUCATING PATIENTS ABOUT IMAGERY 

Some patients can identify images, but do not report them because 
their images are graphic and distressing. They may be reluctant to reex¬ 
perience the distress or fear you will view them as disturbed. If you 
suspect either scenario, normalize the experience of images. 

Therapist: Sally, I don’t know whether you are having images. Most 
people do, but usually they’re more aware of the emotion that 
accompanies the image than they are of the image itself. Some¬ 
times images seem pretty strange, but actually it’s common to have 
all kinds of images—sad, scary, even violent ones. The only prob¬ 
lem is if you think you’re strange for having the images. Can you 
recall any images you’ve had recently? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: Well, we’ve agreed this week that you’re going to be on the 
lookout for images when you notice your mood changing. If you 
are having distressing images. I’ll teach you what you can do about 
them. 

Normalizing and teaching patients about images helps reduce 
their anxiety and makes it more likely that they will be able to identify 
their images. In the previous transcript, I indicate that Sally will learn 


280 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


to respond to images, implying that she can gain control over her dis¬ 
tress. 

You must often be diligent in teaching patients to identify images 
until they “catch on.” Most patients simply are unaware of images ini¬ 
tially, and many therapists, after a few tries, abandon the attempt. If you 
get a visual image yourself as the patient is describing a situation, you 
can use the image as a cue to probe further for an image your patient 
may have experienced: 

Therapist: Sally, as you were just describing how you’re afraid your 
roommate will react, I got a picture of her in my head, even though 
I don’t know her. Have you been imagining how she might look 
when you bring up the problem of noise with her? 


RESPONDING TO SPONTANEOUS IMAGES 

When patients do have distressing images, there are several strategies 
you can teach them. The hrst seven techniques help patients reduce 
their distress by viewing a situation in a different way; the last one offers 
temporary respite by having the patient focus on something else. It is 
important for you to advise patients that they will need to practice the 
techniques in and out of session to use them effectively. 

Following Images to Completion 

This technique is often the most helpful. It can help you and patients 
conceptualize their problem better, lead to cognitive restructuring of 
the image, and provide relief. You will encourage patients to continue 
visualizing a spontaneous image until one of two things occurs: Either 
patients imagine getting through a crisis and feeling better, or they 
imagine an ultimate catastrophe, such as death. (In the latter case, you 
can then explore the feared consequences and meaning of the ultimate 
catastrophe and intervene further.) The hrst transcript illustrates the 
hrst scenario; the patient imagines getting through a particular dif- 
hculty. 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, can you get that image in mind again? Tell it to 
me aloud as you imagine it as vividly as you can. 

PATIENT: I’m sitting in class. My professor is passing out the exam. I’m 
looking at it. My mind is going blank. I read the hrst question. Noth¬ 
ing is making sense. I see everyone else busy writing. I’m thinking, 
“I’m paralyzed. I’m going to fail.” 


Imagery 


281 


Therapist: And you’re feeling ... ? 

Patient: Really, really anxious. 

Therapist: Anything else happen? 

Patient: No. 

Therapist: Okay, [providing psychoeducation] This is very typical. 
You’ve stopped the image at the very tiiorst point, where you’re feel¬ 
ing blank and paralyzed. Now I’d like you to imagine what hap¬ 
pens next. 

PATIENT: Hmmm. I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Well, do you stay that way for the whole hour? 

Patient: No, I guess not. 

Therapist: Can you picture what happens next?... If you’re look¬ 
ing around and seeing the other students, are you actually para¬ 
lyzed? 

PATIENT: No, I guess not. 

Therapist: What do you see happening next? 

Patient: I look at my exam again, but I can’t focus. 

Therapist: Then what happens? 

Patient: I blink. The hrst question doesn’t make any sense to me. 
Therapist: Okay, then what? 

Patient: I skip to the next question. I’m not sure of the answer. 
Therapist: Then what? 

Patient: I keep going until I hnd a question I know something about. 
Therapist: Then what? 

Patient: I guess I write the answer. 

Therapist: Can you see yourself writing the answer? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Good. Then what? 

Patient: I keep going until I hnd something else I can answer. 
Therapist: Then what? 

Patient: I go back to the hrst few questions, try to write something. 
Therapist: Good. Then what? 

Patient: Well, eventually I hnish as much as I can. 

Therapist: Then what? 

Patient: I hand in the paper. 


282 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: And then? 

Patient: I guess I go on to my next class. 

Therapist: And then? 

Patient: I sit down, get out the right notebook. 

Therapist: And how are you feeling in the image now? 

PATIENT: A little shaky still. I don’t know how I did on the exam. 

Therapist: Better than at the start when you were feeling blank and 
paralyzed? 

PATIENT: Yes. Much better. 

Therapist: Good. Let’s review what you did. First, you recognized a 
distressing image, which you stopped at the absolute worst point. 
Then you kept imagining what would realistically happen next 
until you got to the point where you were feeling somewhat better. 
This is what we call “following the image to completion.” {pause) 
Do you think it would help to practice this technique? 

In the previous example, the patient is easily able to identify a rea¬ 
sonable outcome. In some cases, the therapist needs to suggest a modi- 
hcation of the scene: 

Therapist: Can you picture what happens next? ... If you’re looking 
around and seeing the other students, are you actually paralyzed? 
PATIENT: I don’t know. I feel paralyzed. 

Therapist: What do you see happening next? 

Patient: I don’t know. I just keep sitting there, feeling paralyzed. 
Therapist: Do you want to imagine yourself moving around a little in 
the chair, taking a breath, looking out the window? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: Do you want to rub the back of your neck and stretch, to 
make yourself less stiff? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Okay, are you ready now in the image to read through the 
test until something seems familiar? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Are you picturing that? What do you want to imagine hap¬ 
pens next? 

PATIENT: I hnd an easier question. 

Therapist: What do you want to imagine happens next? 


Imagery 


283 


Here I introduce a new element into the image to help Sally get 
“unstuck” and repeatedly ask her what she wants to imagine. I continue 
in this vein until she can continue on her own. 

As mentioned above, sometimes the patient imagines a scene that 
worsens, often catastrophically. The therapist then asks questions to 
determine the meaning of the catastrophe and intervenes accordingly. 
This situation is exemplihed hy a different patient, Marie. 

Therapist: Okay, Marie, so you see yourself in the car and it’s starting 
to drift toward the guard rail of the bridge. Now, get as clear a pic¬ 
ture in your mind as you can. Then what happens? 

PATIENT: It’s getting closer. It crashes through. {Cries softly.) 

Therapist: {gently) Then what? 

Patient: {crying) The car is totally wrecked. 

Therapist: {softly) And you? 

Patient: {crying I’m dead. 

Therapist: Then what happens? 

Patient: I don’t know. I can’t see past that, {still crying) 

Therapist: Marie, I think it’ll help if we try to go a little further. What’s 
the worst part about dying in this crash? 

PATIENT: My kids. They won’t have a mother anymore. They’ll be just 
devastated, {crying harder) 

Therapist: {Waits a moment.) Do you have an image of them? 

In this example, following the image to completion leads to a catas¬ 
trophe. I keep gently questioning so I can determine the special sig- 
nihcance of the catastrophe. A later example in this chapter, inducing 
images to provide distance, illustrates one way to deal with this type of 
problem. In this case, a patient reveals that she has had a new image, of 
her children at her funeral, feeling utterly devastated. Once again, the 
patient has cut off an image at the worst point. (See pages 292-293 for 
an illustration of how the therapist will have the patient imagine her 
children [doing better] many years in the future.) 

In summary, two outcomes are possible when following an image 
to completion. In one instance, the problem is eventually resolved, and 
the patient feels relief. In the second instance, the problem worsens to 
a catastrophe, at which point you ask for the meaning of or the worst 
part about the image, which helps you uncover a new problem. You can 
then help the patient induce a coping image, described later in this 
chapter. 


284 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Jumping Ahead in Time 

At times, following an image to completion is ineffective because 
patients keep imagining more and more obstacles or distressing events 
with no end in sight. At this point, you might suggest that patients imag¬ 
ine themselves at some point in the near future. 

Therapist: [summarizing] Okay, Sally, when you imagine getting 
started on this paper, you keep seeing how hard it is and how much 
effort it’s taking and how many problems you’re having with it. 
Realistically, do you think you’ll eventually finish the paper? 
PATIENT: Yeah, probably. I might have to work day and night for a long 
time, though. 

Therapist: How about if you jump ahead in time and imagine finish¬ 
ing it. Can you picture that? What does that look like? 

PATIENT: Well, I guess I see myself reading it over and making one last 
edit. Then I e-mail it to the professor. 

Therapist: Wait a moment. Can you slow it down a little, really imag¬ 
ine the details? 

Patient: Okay. I’m sitting at my desk in my dorm room. It’s like 2 
o’clock in the morning. It’s hard to keep my eyes open, but I start at 
page I and proofread my work. I find a few mistakes and I fix them, 
then save it in a file. I open my e-mail and send it to my professor. 
Therapist: How do you feel in the image now? 

Patient: Relieved ... like a weight has been taken off my chest. 
Lighter. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s review what we did. You had an image of your¬ 
self starting to work on this paper and the more you imagined, the 
more problems you saw and the more anxious you were getting. 
Then you jumped ahead in time and saw yourself finishing it, which 
made you feel better. How about if we have you write something 
down about this technique—jumping ahead in time—so you’ll be 
able to practice it at home, too. 

Coping in the Image 

Another technique is to guide patients so they can imagine they are 
coping with a difficult situation they have spontaneously envisioned. 

Therapist: [summarizing] So you had an image of walking into the 
[elementary] school library with the student you’ve volunteered to 
tutor, and you’re feeling at a complete loss? And then the kid acts 
up and starts making noise, and you feel as if he’s out of control? 


Imagery 


285 


Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: So once again, you’ve had an image and left yourself at the 
worst point? 

PATIENT: I guess I did. 

Therapist: Can we go through this image again, and this time, see if 
you can imagine coping with each problem as it arises? 

PATIENT: Well, first the kid bangs open the library door. I guess I tell 
him, “Shh. There’s another class in here.” 

Therapist: And then what? 

Patient: He starts veering over to the books. 

Therapist: So you ... 

Patient: I guess I take his hand and guide him to a table. 

The dialogue continues in this way until the patient has successfully 
coped in the image. If necessary, you can ask leading questions to help 
them devise solutions. (“Would you like to imagine that... ?”) You can 
also guide patients to imagine themselves using tools they have learned 
in therapy: for example, reading a coping card, using controlled breath¬ 
ing, and saying self-instructions aloud. 

Changing the Image 

Another technique involves teaching patients to reimagine a sponta¬ 
neous image, changing the ending to alleviate their distress. The first 
example is a realistic change, the second, a “magical” change. 

PATIENT: This morning I was thinking about spring vacation. I can’t go 
home. I’ll have to stay here. I was feeling really down about that. 
Therapist: Did you have an image of what that would be like? 
Patient: I was imagining myself just sitting at my desk, alone in my 
room, kind of slumped over, feeling really bad. 

Therapist: Anything else? 

Patient: No, just that it’s so quiet. The dorm is deserted. 

Therapist: And the image makes you feel... 

Patient: Sad. Real sad. 

Therapist: Sally, you don’t have to be at the mercy of this image. You 
can change it, if you want. It’s as if you’re a movie director: You can 
decide how you want it to be instead. You can change it in a magical 
way ... something that couldn’t really happen. Or you can change 
it to a realistic image. 


286 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: I’m not sure I understand how. 

Therapist: Well, okay, you’re sitting at your desk. What do you wish 
would happen next? 

PATIENT: That my best friend calls me ... or it turns out there are more 
people in the dorm and someone comes knocking on my door, and 
we go to dinner together. 

Therapist: Any other scenario? 

PATIENT: Maybe that I remember there’s some event on campus, like a 
softball game, and I go watch or play. 

Therapist: Those are much better endings. How do you think you’d 
feel if you imagined those things happening? 

PATIENT: Better. But how do I know they’ll come true? 

Therapist: Well, first of all, neither of us really knows if you’ll actually 
end up sitting at your desk, crying. What we do know is imagining it 
makes you feel really sad now. Second, maybe we could talk about 
how to make it more likely that there really is a better ending. What 
could you do so your friend might call, or a dormmate might knock 
on your door, or you might go to a campus event? 

Changing the image in this case leads to a productive discussion involv¬ 
ing problem solving. 

Some images lend themselves to change that is more “magical” in 
nature. Altering the image in this way also usually leads to a reduction 
in distress and allows the patient to act in a more productive way. An 
example follows: 

Therapist: [summarizing, using Sally’s own words] So you have an 
image of your professor standing very tall over you, scowling, speak¬ 
ing harshly, stomping his foot, being overbearing, and the image 
makes you very anxious? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Would you like to change the image? Imagine him in a 
different way? 

Patient: How? 

Therapist: I don’t know... He kind of reminds me of a 3-year-old hav¬ 
ing a tantrum. Can you imagine that he shrinks down in size but 
still is scowling, still stomping his foot? 

Patient: (Smiles.) Yes. 

Therapist: Describe him to me, in detail. (Patient does so.) And how do 
you feel now? As anxious? 


Imagery 


287 


Patient: No, less. 

Therapist: Has it come down enough to let you go make an appoint¬ 
ment with him? 

PATIENT: Yes, I think so. 

Therapist: Okay, let’s review what we just did. We started with an image 
you had of your professor. It sounded as if this image was so dis¬ 
tressing that it stopped you from doing what you need to do—make 
an appointment with him. Then you took control of the image hy 
changing it and your anxiety came down, enough for you to go and 
meet with him. We call this technique “changing the image.” 

Reality Testing the Image 

Here you teach patients to treat images like verbal automatic thoughts, 

using standard Socratic questioning. 

Therapist: So you had an image of me frowning and looking disap¬ 
proving when you told me you hadn’t done part of your home¬ 
work? 

Patient: (Nods.) 

Therapist: What’s the evidence that I would frown and he disapprov¬ 
ing? ... Do you have any evidence on the other side? 

In another situation, I teach Sally to compare a spontaneous image 

with what is really happening. 

PATIENT: I was in the library late last night, and I had an image of the 
building being real deserted, and then I saw myself suddenly feel¬ 
ing really sick and passing out and having no one there to help 
me. 

Therapist: Was it true that the library was completely deserted? 

PATIENT: No. It was getting late, near closing time, but there were still 
a few people around. 

Therapist: Okay. With this kind of image, when you’re spontaneously 
imagining something happening right at the moment, you can do 
a reality check. You can ask yourself, “Is the library deserted? Am 
I actually feeling really sick right now?” If you had known to do 
that last night, what do you think would have happened to your 
mood? 

PATIENT: I’d have felt less nervous. 


288 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


In general, it is preferable to use techniques in imagery form when 
dealing with images, rather than the verbal techniques suggested in 
this section. However, patients who have many vivid, distressing images 
will benefit from a variety of techniques, and sometimes the verbal 
technique of a reality check is helpful. 

Repeating the Image 

The repetition technique can be useful when patients are clearly imag¬ 
ining exaggerated outcomes. You suggest that they keep imagining the 
original image over and over again, paying attention to whether the 
image and their level of distress change. Some patients seem to do an 
automatic reality check, and envision each succeeding image more real¬ 
istically and with less dysphoria. 

Therapist: Okay, Sally, so you had the image of asking your profes¬ 
sor for an extension, and he clearly got quite upset, yelling at you, 
bending over close to you, waving his hands wildly, saying, “How 
dare you! You knew when it was due. Get out!” 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: I wonder, could you imagine this again? Start out the same 
way. See what happens. 

PATIENT: {Closes eyes.) 

Therapist: Finished? What happened? 

PATIENT: He was pretty upset. He yelled at me, told me to get out. 

Therapist: This time did he wave his hands, bend over too close to 
you? 

PATIENT: No. He just stood up and stiffened his arms on his desk. 
Therapist: Okay. Do the same thing again. 

I ask Sally to repeat the scene three or four times. By the last rep¬ 
etition, her image has changed quite a bit: The professor leans back 
in his chair, gives Sally an annoyed look, and says no in an unkind but 
nonthreatening way. Sally’s anxiety diminishes significantly. 

Substituting Images 

Substituting a more pleasant image has been extensively described else¬ 
where (e.g.. Beck & Emery, 1985). It, too, must be regularly practiced in 
order for the patient to experience relief from distressing spontaneous 
images: 


Imagery 


289 


Therapist: Sally, another way of dealing with this kind of upsetting 
image is to substitute a different one. Some people like to imagine 
that the distressing image is a picture on a television set. Then they 
imagine changing the channel to a different scene, like lying on a 
beach, or walking through the woods, or recalling a pleasant mem¬ 
ory. Would you like to try this technique? First, you’ll picture the 
pleasant scene in as much detail as possible, using as many senses 
as possible; then I’ll have you practice switching from a distressing 
image to the pleasant one. Now, what pleasant scene would you like 
to imagine? 


INDUCING IMAGERY AS A THERAPEUTIC TOOL 

At times, you will induce an image as opposed to help a patient respond 
to a spontaneous image. Covert rehearsal to uncover obstacles related 
to homework is one example (pages 303-305). Three other induced 
imaginal techniques are described next. 

Rehearsal of Coping Techniques 

You will use this technique to help patients practice using coping strate¬ 
gies in imagination. This technique differs from “coping in the image” 
because here you induce an image rather than having patients imagine 
how they would cope in a spontaneous image. 

Therapist: Okay, you’re predicting that you’re going to have a rough 
time giving the oral report in class. 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: When will you hrst notice your anxiety going up? 

PATIENT: When I wake up. 

Therapist: And what will be going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I’m going to mess up. And I’ll picture myself stammering and 
stuttering and being unable to talk. 

Therapist: You mean in class? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Okay, what could you do? 

Patient: Tell myself to relax. Remind myself I’ve practiced this a lot. 
Therapist: Okay, what then? 

Patient: I could do some controlled breathing. That relaxes me 
some. 


290 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Okay, can you see yourself doing that? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Then what? 

Patient: I feel a little better, hut I’m still too nervous for breakfast. I 
just shower, get dressed, get ready to go. 

Therapist: What’s going through your mind? 

PATIENT: What if I keep getting more and more nervous? 

Therapist: How about imagining yourself reading the coping card 
[we made a few minutes ago] on the way to class? Can you imagine 
pulling it out and reading it? 

PATIENT: Yeah ... I guess it helps some. 

Therapist: As you get near class, how about if you imagine jumping 
ahead in time. You’ve hnished the talk, and now you’re sitting there 
listening to someone else ... How do you feel now? 

PATIENT: Some relief. Still worried, but not as bad. 

Therapist: Okay, now you’re walking into class. What happens next, 
and what do you do? 

The patient continues imagining herself realistically coping with 
the situation in detail. Then she writes down the specihc techniques 
she predicts will help. 

Distancing 

Distancing is another induced imagery technique to reduce distress 
and help patients see problems in greater perspective. In the follow¬ 
ing example, I help Sally see that her difficulties are likely to be time 
limited. 

Therapist: Sally, I know you’re feeling kind of hopeless now, and 
you’re predicting that these problems will go on and on. Do you 
think it would help if you could envision getting through this rough 
period? 

PATIENT: I guess. But it’s hard to imagine. 

Therapist: Well, let’s see. How about if you try to picture yourself a 
year from now? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: Any idea what life is like? 

Patient: I don’t know. It’s hard for me to think that far ahead. 


Imagery 


291 


Therapist: Well, let’s be concrete. When do you wake up? Where are 
you? 

PATIENT: Probably I wake up around 8:00 or 8:30.1 guess I’m in an off- 
campus apartment. 

Therapist: Living alone? 

Patient: Maybe in a house with other students, some people from my 
floor this year. We’ve been talking about it. 

Therapist: Okay, you wake up. What happens next? 

Patient: I probably rush off to class. It’ll take longer to get there if I’m 
not in a dorm. 

Therapist: Do you see any of your housemates before you go? Do you 
go to class alone or with one of them? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: Well, it’s your image. You decide. 

Patient: Okay, I guess I’d walk over with one of them. 

Therapist: What do you talk about on the way—or are you silent? 

Patient: Oh no, we’d be talking about school or people we know. 
Something like that. 

Therapist: Then what? 

Patient: I’d go to class. 

Therapist: A big lecture hall like most of your classes this year? 

Patient: No, probably not, classes should be smaller next year. 

Therapist: And what do you want to imagine happens in class? Do you 
interact or are you quiet? 

PATIENT: Well, hopefully by then I’d know more people. I’d feel more 
comfortable. I’d probably still be quiet, but I might be participat¬ 
ing more. 

Therapist: How do you feel when you imagine this scene? 

Patient: Good. 

Therapist: How would you feel about finishing out this scene for 
homework? Then every time you have the thought, “I’ll never get 
out of this,” you could try switching to this scene to see if it has an 
effect on your mood. 

Patient: I’ll try. 

Therapist: Now is this just the power of positive thinking, imagining 
this scene? Or could you really do some things to make it happen? 
In fact, aren’t you already doing things to make it happen? 

PATIENT: That’s true. 


292 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 

Another distancing technique helps a patient deal with the imag¬ 
ined aftermath of a catastrophe. Marie, described previously, fears that 
her children would be devastated forever if she died. Her therapist has 
her imagine their realistic level of distress at different points in time, 
instead of just immediately after the accident. (This technique is simi¬ 
lar to jumping ahead in time; it involves the passage of years, though, 
instead of minutes, hours, or days.) 

Therapist: Marie, who do you imagine breaks the news of your death 
to the kids? 

PATIENT: My husband. 

Therapist: How does he do it? 

Patient: {sobbing He puts his arms around them. He says, “There’s 
been an accident. Mommy’s gone.” 

Therapist: And then? 

Patient: They don’t believe it, not really, at hrst. They start crying and 
saying, “No, it’s not true. I want Mommy.” 

Therapist: They’re feeling pretty bad? 

Patient: Yeah. Real bad. 

Therapist: {Waits a moment.) Can you jump ahead some? It’s now 6 
months later. What’s going on now? Can you see them? 

PATIENT: They’re in school. Looking real sad. Bewildered. Kind of 
empty. 

Therapist: How bad are they feeling? 

Patient: Still pretty bad. 

Therapist: Can we jump ahead 2 years? How old will they be? 
Patient: Melissa will be 8. Linda will be 7. 

Therapist: What do you see them doing? 

Patient: Playing outside. It’s our house. I don’t think my husband 
would move. 

Therapist: What are they playing? 

Patient: They’re jumping rope with the neighbor kids. 

Therapist: How are they feeling now? 

Patient: Okay, when they don’t think about me. 

Therapist: And when they do? 

Patient: {Tears up.) They still cry sometimes. It’s confusing. 
Therapist: As bad as when they hrst found out? 

Patient: No, not that bad. 


Imagery 


293 


The therapist gently leads Marie through a succession of images 5, 
10, and 20 years after her imagined death. Through this exercise, Marie 
is able to see that the initial devastation her daughters feel eventually 
subsides to briefer periods of sadness and grief with which they are able 
to cope. Imagining in detail that her daughters grow up and create new 
families of their own signihcantly reduces Marie’s fear of her own death 
in an automobile accident. 

Reduction of Perceived Threat 

A third type of induced image is designed to allow patients to view a 
situation with a more realistic assessment of actual threat. For example, 
I encouraged Sally to modify her image of her class presentation by 
imagining the encouraging faces of her friends in the room. Pam, a 
patient who feared undergoing a Caesarean section, envisioned all the 
life-saving equipment in the delivery room and the caring faces of the 
nurse and doctor behind their masks. 

In summary, many if not most patients experience automatic 
thoughts in the form of spontaneous images. Persistent (though nonin- 
trusive) questioning is often required to help patients recognize their 
images. Patients who do have frequent, distressing images beneht from 
regular practice of several imagery techniques. In addition, images may 
be induced for various therapeutic purposes. 


Chapter 17 

HOMEWORK 


H omework is an integral, not optional, part of cognitive behavior 
therapy (Beck et ah, 1979). A number of researchers have found 
that cognitive behavior therapy patients who carry out homework assign¬ 
ments progress better in therapy than those who do not (e.g., Kazantzis, 
Whittington, & Datillio, 2010; Neimeyer & Feixas, 1990; Persons, Burns 
& Perloff, 1988). You seek to extend the opportunities for cognitive and 
behavioral change throughout the patient’s week. You prepare the patient 
for doing homework in the first session. 

Therapist: Sally, 1 think it would be important for you to read this 
[statement about being depressed, not lazy] every day. Do you 
think you could do that? 

PATIENT: Yes, 1 think so. 

Therapist: In fact, reminding yourself of important things we talk 
about in session is one way you’re going to get over your depres¬ 
sion. Another way is by changing some of the things that you do. 
We’ve found that it’s not enough for people to just come and talk. 
They need to make small changes in their thinking and behavior 
every day. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: But we’ll always make sure that you think the changes are 
a good idea and that you’ll be able to do them. Now, what should 
we call these changes? Homework? Your action plan? Something 
else? 


294 


Homework 


295 


PATIENT: Homework, I guess. 

Therapist: Okay, but I want you to remember that this isn’t like school 
homework. This is homework that you think will help, that we’ll 
design together, just for you. 

Good homework assignments provide opportunities for patients 
to educate themselves further (e.g., through bibliotherapy), to collect 
data (e.g., through monitoring their thoughts, feelings, and behavior), 
to test their thoughts and beliefs, to modify their thinking, to practice 
cognitive and behavioral tools, and to experiment with new behaviors. 
Homework can maximize what was learned in a therapy session and 
lead to an increase in patients’ sense of self-efficacy. 

Many patients do homework quite willingly and easily; a few do 
not. It is important to note that even the most experienced therapists 
encounter difficulty with an occasional patient who, despite careful 
preparation, rarely does any written assignments. Nevertheless, you 
should initially assume that any patient (unless he or she is very low 
functioning) will do homework if you set it up properly. To enhance the 
probability that patients will comply, you need to take care, for exam¬ 
ple, to: 


• Tailor assignments to the individual, 

• Provide a sound rationale, 

• Uncover potential obstacles, and 

• Modify relevant beliefs. 


This chapter is divided into four parts: 

1. Setting homework assignments. 

2. Increasing the likelihood of successful completion of home¬ 
work. 

3. Conceptualizing problems. 

4. Reviewing completed homework. 


SETTING HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENTS 

There is no set formula for assigning homework. Rather, you tailor 
homework to the individual patient. How do you decide what to sug¬ 
gest? It depends on what you have discussed in session, which is influ¬ 
enced by your overall treatment plan and the patient’s goals. You take 



296 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


into consideration individual characteristics of patients: their reading 
and writing abilities, their motivation and willingness to comply with 
homework, their current level of distress and functioning (cognitive, 
emotional, and behavioral), and practical constraints (e.g., of time), to 
name a few. 

You may need to take the lead in suggesting homework assignments 
at the beginning of treatment but you begin, as soon as possible, to ask 
patients to devise their own assignments (e.g., “Now that we’ve hnished 
talking about this problem with your roommate, what do you think 
would be helpful for you to remember this week? To do this week?”). 
Patients who routinely set their own homework by the end of therapy 
are more likely to continue doing so when treatment has ended. 

In this hrst section, typical assignments are presented; then a sam¬ 
ple of Sally’s homework assignments are provided. The hnal portion of 
this chapter offers guidelines for increasing homework adherence. 

Ongoing Homework Assignments 

Typical ongoing homework assignments are discussed below. 

1. Behavioral activation. Getting inactive, depressed patients out of 
bed or off the couch and helping them resume their normal activities 
(and engage in new activities) is essential. Activity scheduling benehts 
other patients as well. 

2. Monitoring automatic thoughts. From the hrst session forward, you 
will encourage your patients to ask themselves, “What’s going through 
my mind right now?” when they notice their mood changing, and 
remind themselves that their thinking may or may not be true. Initially 
they may jot down their thoughts (in their smartphone, on their com¬ 
puter, or simply on paper, in a notebook, or on an index card). Advise 
patients that monitoring their automatic thoughts can lead them to feel 
worse, if they accept them uncritically, and that you will do problem 
solving with them if their thoughts do turn out to be valid. 

3. Evaluating and responding to automatic thoughts. At virtually every 
session, you will help patients modify their inaccurate and dysfunc¬ 
tional thoughts and write down their new way of thinking. An essential 
homework assignment is to have them read these therapy notes on a 
regular basis. Patients will also learn to evaluate their own thinking and 
practice doing so between sessions. 

4. Problem solving. At virtually every session, you will help patients 
devise solutions to their problems, which they will implement between 
sessions. 

5. Behavioral skills. To effectively solve their problems, patients may 
need to learn new skills, which they will practice for homework. For 


Homework 


297 


example, you might teach relaxation skills to anxious patients, asser¬ 
tiveness skills to socially anxious patients, or organizational and time 
management skills to patients who would beneht from them. 

6. Behavioral experiments. Patients may need to directly test the valid¬ 
ity of automatic thoughts that seem distorted, such as “I’ll feel better if 
I stay in bed”; “My roommate will get mad if I bring up the problem of 
noise”; “No one will talk to me at the meeting.” 

7. Bibliotherapy. Important concepts you are discussing in session 
can be greatly reinforced when patients read about them in black and 
white. It is usually valuable to have patients both read and note their 
reactions: what they agreed with, disagreed with, and had questions 
about. 

8. Preparing for the next therapy session. The beginning part of each 
therapy session can be greatly speeded up if patients think about what 
is important to tell you before they enter your office. The Preparing for 
Therapy Worksheet (page 102) can help prepare them. 

A Sampling of Homework Assignments for Sally 

Some of the assignments below are helpful for almost any depressed 
patient; others were specihcally designed for this particular patient. 

Session 1 

Read this list twice a day; set an alarm to remember. 

1. If I start thinking I’m lazy and no good, remind myself that I have 
a real illness, called depression, that makes it harder for me to do 
things. As the treatment starts to work, my depression will lift, and 
things will get easier. 

2. Read goal list and add others, if I think of any. 

3. When I notice my mood getting worse, ask myself, “What’s going 
through my mind right now?” and jot down the thoughts. Remind 
myself that just because I think something doesn’t necessarily mean 
it’s true. 

4. Make plans with Allison and Joe. Remember, if they say no, it’s likely 
that they’d like to hang out with me but they’re too busy. 

5. Read Coping with Depression booklet (optional). 

Session 2 

1. Daily: When I notice my mood changing, ask myself, “What’s going 
through my mind right now?” and jot down my automatic thoughts 
(which may or may not be completely true). 

2. If I can’t hgure out my automatic thoughts, jot down just the situa- 


298 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


tion. Remember, learning to identify my thinking is a skill I’ll get 
better at, like typing. 

3. Ask Sean for help with Chapter 5 of Econ book. 

4. Daily: Read therapy notes. 

5. Continue running/swimming. 

6. Plan two to three social activities. 

7. Daily: Add to credit list (anything I do that is even a little difficult 
but I do it anyway). 

8. (Tuesday morning): Review Preparing for Therapy Worksheet for 2 
minutes. 

Session 3 

1. Daily: Read therapy notes. 

2. Daily: When my mood changes, use Question List and answer men¬ 
tally or in writing. 

3. Daily: Add to credit list. 

4. Daily: Follow activity chart. 

5. Ask Lisa to study for Chem exam with me. 

6. (Tuesday morning): Review Preparing for Therapy Worksheet. 

Session 4 

1. Daily: Read therapy notes. 

2. Daily: When my mood changes, do first four columns of Thought 
Records in writing. Answer questions at bottom mentally. 

3. Daily: Credit list. 

4. Go for a walk or a run at least three days this week. 

5. Make plans with friends. 

6. Do activities we scheduled on activity chart. 

7. Discuss late-night noise with Jane. 

8. (Tuesday morning): Review Preparing for Therapy Worksheet. 
Session 3 

1. Daily: Read therapy notes. 

2. Daily: Thought Records mentally or in writing. 

3. Daily: Credit list. 

4. Daily: Follow activity chart. 

5. Ask Chem professor for help. 

Session 6 

1. Daily: Read therapy notes. 

2. As needed: Thought Records. 

3. Daily: Credit list. 


Homework 


299 


4. Schedule activities. 

5. Call Mom about summer plans. 

Session 7 

1. Daily: Read therapy notes. 

2. As needed: Thought Records. 

3. Daily: Credit list. 

4. Schedule activities. 

5. Make a comment or ask a question in class. 
Session 9 

1. Daily: Therapy notes. 

2. As needed: Thought Records. 

3. Daily: Credit list. 

4. Schedule activities. 

5. FillinCBW. 

6. Bring up clutter problem with Jane. 

7. Go to Dr. Smith during office hours. 

Session 12 (Penultimate Session) 

1. Thought Record about termination. 

2. Organize therapy notes from beginning. 

3. Review notes on doing a self-therapy session. 


INCREASING HOMEWORK ADHERENCE 

Although some patients easily do the suggested assignments, home¬ 
work is more problematic for others. Implementation of the following 
guidelines increases the likelihood that patients will be successful with 
homework and experience an elevation in mood: 


1. Tailor the assignment to the individual. (Be 90-100% sure the 
patient can and will do the assignment.) Err on the side of devising 
assignments that are too easy rather than too hard. 

2. Provide a rationale as to how and why the assignment might help. 

3. Set homework collaboratively; seek the patient’s input and 
agreement. 

4. Make homework a no-lose proposition. 

5. Begin the assignment (when possible) in session. 

6. Help set up systems for remembering to do the assignment. 





300 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


7. Anticipate possible problems; do covert rehearsal when indicated. 

8. Prepare for a possible negative outcome (when applicable). 


Tailoring Homework to the Individual 

Successful completion of homework can speed up therapy and lead to 
an increased sense of mastery and improved mood. Rather than sug¬ 
gesting assignments according to a prescribed formula, you should 
consider the patient’s characteristics (mentioned in the introduction to 
this chapter) and desires. 

Matt, for example, was a patient who did not grasp the cognitive 
model in the first session and, indeed, became slightly irritated when his 
(novice) therapist kept pushing him to identify his automatic thoughts. 
He told his therapist, “You don’t understand; I don’t know what is going 
through my mind at the time; all I know is that I’m very upset.’’ A home¬ 
work assignment to jot down his automatic thoughts would have been 
inappropriate for this session. A second patient, Caitlin, on the other 
hand, had already read a popular book on cognitive behavior therapy 
and had an unusually good grasp of her automatic thoughts. Her initial 
homework assignment was to complete the first four columns of the 
Thought Record whenever she became upset. 

While the type of assignment is important, so is the amount of 
homework. Sally was a motivated patient who was “in sync” with home¬ 
work, as she was still a student. She was easily able to accomplish more 
between sessions than Matt, who was severely depressed and had been 
out of school for many years. 

A third step in tailoring homework to the individual patient involves 
breaking down assignments into manageable steps. Examples include 
reading one chapter of a layman’s cognitive behavior therapy book or 
school textbook, doing the first four columns of a Thought Record, 
spending 10-15 minutes paying bills, doing just one load of laundry, 
and spending just five minutes at a supermarket. 

It is important to predict potential difficulties before assigning 
homework. Patients’ diagnoses and personality styles can be a guide. 
Severely depressed patients, for example, initially will probably ben¬ 
efit more from behavioral (as opposed to cognitive) tasks. Avoidant 
patients shy away from behavioral assignments that they perceive as too 
challenging or likely to evoke a high level of dysphoria. Patients who 
are feeling anxious and overwhelmed might feel incapable of doing any 
assignment if you suggest too many tasks. It is much better to err on the 
side of providing homework assignments that are a little too easy. Fail¬ 
ure to carry out an assignment, or to do it properly, often leads a patient 
to be self-critical or feel hopeless. 





Homework 


301 


Providing a Rationaie 

Patients are more likely to comply with homework assignments if they 
understand the reason for doing them. I introduce a homework assign¬ 
ment to Sally in this way: 

Therapist: Sally, research shows that exercise often helps people 
become less depressed. What do you think about taking a walk or a 
run a few times this week? 

You will provide a brief rationale initially; later in treatment, you 
will encourage patients to think about the purpose of an assignment, 
for example, “Sally, what would be the point of checking with your 
roommate about her plans for this weekend?” or “Why might it be a 
good idea to continue keeping the credit list?” It is also important to 
emphasize that homework is an essential part of treatment: 

Therapist: The way people get better is to make small changes in their 
thinking and behavior every day. 

Setting Homework Coiiaborativeiy 

Ideally, patients would set their own homework, but at the beginning 
of treatment they do not know which assignments would be beneficial. 
Instead, you will make suggestions and ensure they agree: “What do 
you think about asking your boss for time off?”; “Do you think it could 
help if you read this coping card before you leave the house?”; “Do you 
want to try [a particular technique] this week?”; “I think if you get in 
the shower as soon as you get up, you’ll demonstrate to yourself that 
you can take control. What do you think? Is this something you want 
to try?” If patients are hesitant or skeptical, you will need to prepare 
them further. Either elicit and help them respond to their automatic 
thoughts and/or make the assignment much easier. 

As therapy progresses, you will encourage patients to set their own 
assignments. “What would you like to do this week about [this prob¬ 
lem] ?”; “What could you do this week if you start getting uncomfortably 
anxious?”; “How will you handle [this problem] if it does arise?” 

Making Homework a No-Lose Proposition 

It is helpful when initially setting up assignments to stress that useful 
data can be obtained even if patients fail to complete their homework. 
Patients who do not do the homework are less likely to brand them¬ 
selves as failures and thus feel more dysphoric: 


302 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Sally, if you get this homework done, that’s good. But if 
you have trouble doing it, that’s okay—-just see if you can hgure out 
what thoughts are getting in your way, and we’ll talk about those 
thoughts next time. Okay? 

Sometimes patients fail to do a signihcant portion of their home¬ 
work for two weeks in a row, or they do it immediately before the ther¬ 
apy session instead of daily. In these cases, you should uncover the 
psychological and/or practical obstacles that got in the way and stress 
how essential homework is, instead of continuing to make it a no-lose 
proposition. 

Starting Homework in the Session 

If you can, have patients begin assignments right in the therapy session 
itself; they will be far more likely to follow through at home. Continuing 
an assignment is much easier than initiating one. This is especially criti¬ 
cal because patients often describe the hardest part of doing homework 
as the period jMst before they initiate it—that is, motivating themselves to 
get started. Ifyouyourself hnd that you, too, occasionally have difficulty 
initiating a task (e.g., getting yourself to work on a paper, pay taxes, or 
start exercising), but hnd it much easier after a few minutes, you can 
self-disclose this to patients to normalize the experience and provide a 
role model for them to think about when they are procrastinating. 

Remembering to Do Homework 

It is vital to write down, or have patients write down, their assignments 
every week, starting with the hrst session. Ask them where they will keep 
the assignment list (or notebook) and how likely they think they might 
be to forget to look at the list on one or more days. If even slightly likely, 
you might suggest several strategies: You can ask patients to: 

• Pair an assignment with another daily activity (e.g., “How about 
pulling out the activity chart at mealtimes and right before 
bed?”). 

• Post notes on their refrigerator, their bathroom mirror, or the 
dashboard of their car. 

• Use their appointment book, smartphone, or computer to cue 
them. 

• Ask another person to cue them. 

You can also ask them how they remember to do other regularly sched¬ 
uled activities, such as taking medication. 


Homework 


303 


Anticipating Probiems 

To maximize the likelihood that you are suggesting reasonable assign¬ 
ments that patients are likely to do, consider the following: 

Is the amount and degree of difficulty of homework 
reasonable for this patient, or will it feel overwhelming? 

Is it related to the patient's goals? 

• How likely is the patient to do it? 

What practical problems may get in the way (time, 
energy, opportunity)? 

What thoughts may get in the way? 


The single most important question to ask patients to assess the 
prohahility of adherence is: 


How likely are you to do this, 0-100%? 


If patients are less than 90-100% conhdent, use one or more of the 
following strategies: 


1. Covert rehearsal. 

2. Change the assignment. 

3. Do an intellectual/emotional role play. 


These stategies are described below. 

Covert Rehearsal 

Covert rehearsal, illustrated below, uses induced imagery to uncover 
and solve potential homework-related problems. 

Therapist: Sally, do you think anything will get in the way of your 
going to the teaching assistant for help? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: [getting her to specify and commit to a time] When would 
be a good time to go? 

PATIENT: Friday morning, I guess. That’s when his office hours are. 





304 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Can you imagine it’s Friday morning right now? Can you 
picture it? Can you imagine saying to yourself, “I really should go 
to the TA’s office”? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: [asking for details so Sally will more easily he able to visu¬ 
alize the scene and accurately identify her thoughts and emotions] 
Where are you? 

PATIENT: In my room. 

Therapist: Doing what? 

Patient: Well, I just hnished getting dressed. 

Therapist: And how are you feeling? 

Patient: A little nervous, I guess. 

Therapist: And what’s going through your mind? 

PATIENT: I don’t want to go. Maybe I’ll just read the chapter again 
myself. 

Therapist: And how are you going to answer those thoughts? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: Do you want to remind yourself it’s just an experiment, 
that we won’t know what happens until you go? That if he’s not 
helpful, we’ll hgure out Plan B together? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I think so. 

Therapist: Would it help to put that on a coping card you can read a 
few times between now and Friday? 

Patient: Probably. 

Therapist: Okay. Now can you imagine you’re dressed and you’re 
thinking, “I’ll just read the chapter myself instead of going”? Now 
what happens? 

PATIENT: I think, “Wait a minute. This is supposed to be an experi¬ 
ment. Now where’s that coping card?” 

Therapist: Oh, where is it? 

Patient: Knowing me. I’d have to look for it. 

Therapist: Is there someplace you could put it as soon as you get back 
today? 

PATIENT: I don’t exactly want my roommate to see it ... Maybe in the 
bottom drawer of my desk. 

Therapist: Okay. And if you’ve already read it on Wednesday and 
Thursday, you’ll probably remember where it is. Can you imagine 
pulling out the card and reading it? 


Homework 


305 


Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Now, what happens? 

Patient: Probably I remember why I should go, but I still don’t want to. 

So I decide to clean my room hrst. 

Therapist: What could you remind yourself at this point? 

PATIENT: That I may as well go and get it over with. That maybe it really 
will help. That if I stop and clean I may end up not going at all. 
Therapist: Good. Then what happens? 

Patient: I go. 

Therapist: And then? 

Patient: I get there. I ask him the question. I don’t understand it all. 
I tell him what I’m confused about. He probably helps, at least 
some. 

Therapist: And how do you feel at this point? 

Patient: Better. 

This kind of covert rehearsal helps you discover which practical 
obstacles and dysfunctional cognitions may hinder the completion of 
homework. 

Changing the Assignment 

Changing the assignment may be indicated if you judge that an assign¬ 
ment is inappropriate or if covert rehearsal has not been sufficiently 
effective. It is far better to substitute an easier homework assignment 
that patients are likely to do than to have them establish a habit of not 
doing what they had agreed to in session: 

Therapist: Sally, I’m not sure you’re ready to do this. [Or, “I’m not 
sure this assignment is appropriate.”] What do you think? Do you 
want to go ahead and try or wait until another time? 

You can also collaboratively decide to make certain assignments 
optional or to decrease the frequency or duration of a homework task. 
It is far better for patients to do less homework than no homework at 
all. 

intettectuat-Emotionat Rote Ptay 

An intellectual-emotional role play may help motivate reluctant 
patients when the therapist judges it is quite important for a patient to 


306 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


do a given assignment. This technique is not used early in therapy, as it 
can be perceived as somewhat challenging. 

Therapist: Tm still not sure you’ll actually pull out the coping card to 
get you going. 

PATIENT: Probably not. 

Therapist: Okay, how about if we do an intellectual-emotional role 
play about this? We’ve done this before. I’ll be the intellectual part 
of you; you be the emotional part. You argue as hard as you can 
against me so I can see all the arguments you’re using not to read 
your coping cards and start studying. You start. 

PATIENT: Okay. I don’t feel like doing this. 

Therapist: It’s true that I don’t feel like doing it, but that’s irrelevant. 
It doesn’t matter if I feel like it or not. It’s what I need to do. 

PATIENT: But I can do it later. 

Therapist: True, but my usual pattern is not to do it later. I don’t want 
to reinforce a bad habit by putting it off. Here I have the opportu¬ 
nity to strengthen a new, better habit. 

PATIENT: But it won’t matter this one time. 

Therapist: True. Any one individual time isn’t all that crucial. On the 
other hand. I’ll be better off in the long run if I strengthen this 
good habit as much as I can. 

PATIENT: I don’t know, I just don’t want to. 

Therapist: I don’t have to pay attention to what I want to do now or 
don’t want to do now. In the long run, I want to do things that I need 
to, so I can graduate, get a good job, and feel good about myself, 
and I don’t want to constantly avoid things I don’t feel like doing. 

PATIENT: ... I’ve run out of arguments. 

Therapist: Okay. Let’s switch parts, then we’ll get some of it down in 
writing. 

Following role reversal, you have another choice point. You can col- 
laboratively reassign the original homework task (e.g., “How do you feel 
now about trying [this assignment]?”). If patients do decide to keep 
the assignment, you and they can jointly write a coping card with some 
points mentioned in the role play above. If you believe it is unlikely that 
the patient will fulfill the assignment, however, you should suggest a 
change in homework or make the assignment optional. 


Homework 


307 


Preparing for a Possible Negative Outcome 

When devising a behavioral experiment or testing an assumption, it is 
important to set up a scenario that is likely to succeed. For example, Sally 
and I discussed which professor was most likely to be receptive to ques¬ 
tions after class, what words she might use when negotiating late-night 
noise with her roommate, and how much help was reasonable to ask from 
her friend. It is a good idea, though, to have patients predict likely auto¬ 
matic thoughts or beliefs if the experiment does not turn out well. 

Therapist: Now I suppose it could happen that Ross says he can’t help 
you. If that happens, what will go through your mind? 

PATIENT: That I shouldn’t have asked. That he probably thinks I’m stu¬ 
pid for asking. 

Therapist: [seeking an alternative explanation] What other reasons 
might he have for saying no? 

PATIENT: That he was too busy. 

Therapist: Or is it possible that he doesn’t understand the material 
well enough to explain it to you? Or, that he simply doesn’t like 
tutoring? Or, that he’s preoccupied with something else? 

PATIENT: I guess so. 

Therapist: Do you have any evidence so far that he thinks you’re stu¬ 
pid? 

PATIENT: No, but we did disagree about politics. 

Therapist: And did you get the idea that he thought your ideas were 
definitely stupid or that you simply had another point of view? 
PATIENT: That we just felt differently about it. 

Therapist: So as far as you know, he doesn’t view you as stupid? 
Patient: No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: So even if he turns you down, it won’t necessarily be that he’s 
changed his view of you, based on your request for help? 

PATIENT: No, I guess not. 

Therapist: Okay, we’ve agreed that you’ll approach him later today 
and ask for help. Either he’ll help you, and that’s good, or he’ll say 
no, and then what will you remind yourself? 

PATIENT: That it doesn’t mean he thinks I’m stupid. He may just be 
busy or unsure of the stuff himself or not like to tutor people. 

Therapist: Good, let’s write that down, just in case. 


308 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Advance discussion of potential problems guards against dysphoria 
when an experiment does not turn out well. 


CONCEPTUALIZING DIFFICULTIES 

When patients have difficulty doing their homework, conceptualize 
why the problem arose. Was it related to: 


A practical problem? 

A psychological problem? 

• A psychological problem masked as a practical problem? 
A problem related to the therapist’s cognitions? 


Practical Problems 

Most practical problems can be avoided if you carefully set the assign¬ 
ment and prepare the patient to do it. Covert rehearsal (described ear¬ 
lier) can also ferret out potential difficulties. Four common practical 
problems and their remedies are described next. 

Doing Therapy Homework at the Last Minute 

Ideally, patients carry on the work of the therapy session throughout the 
week. For example, it is most useful for patients to catch and record 
their automatic thoughts at the moment they notice their mood chang¬ 
ing and to respond to these thoughts either mentally or in writing. 
Some patients avoid thinking about therapy between sessions. Often, 
this avoidance is part of a larger problem, and you may first have to 
help patients identify and modify certain beliefs (e.g., “If I focus on a 
problem instead of distracting myself. I’ll only feel worse” or “I can’t 
change, so why even try?”). Other patients, however, need only a gentle 
reminder to look at their homework list daily. 

Forgetting the Rationale for an Assignment 

Occasionally, patients neglect an assignment because they do not 
remember why they were asked to do it. This problem can be avoided 
by having patients (who have demonstrated this difficulty) record the 
rationale next to an assignment. 



Homework 


309 


PATIENT: I didn’t do the relaxation exercises [or read the coping cards 
or practice controlled breathing or record my activities] because I 
was feeling hne this week. 

Therapist: Do you remember what we said a few weeks ago—^why it’s 
helpful to practice this every day, regardless of how you’re feeling? 
PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Well, let’s say you don’t practice your relaxation exercises 
for a couple of weeks. Then you have a very stressful week. How 
sharp will your skills be then? 

Patient: Not very. 

Therapist: Could we have you write down relaxation exercises for 
homework again this week with a reminder that you want to be 
really good at relaxation before you need to use it? {pause) Any 
other problems with practicing it? 

Disorganization or Lack of Accountabiiity 

Many patients are more likely to do assignments when they have to 
mark off a daily checklist indicating whether they fulhlled an assign¬ 
ment. You or patients can draw a simple diagram (Figure 17.1) in ses¬ 
sion. Instruct patients to check off each assignment they complete each 
day. This technique both helps patients remember to do assignments 
and also makes them face what they are not doing. 

Alternately, patients can write down assignments on a daily calen¬ 
dar or appointment book. (Do the hrst day together in the office and 
ask patients to write down the rest in the reception room after the ses¬ 
sion.) Later, after completing assignments, patients can check or cross 
them off. 

A third technique, which you might use with patients whose adher¬ 
ence is likely to be low, is suggesting that they call your office to leave a 
message when they have completed an assignment. Knowing that you 
expect a message may motivate patients to do the homework. 



W 

Th 

F 

Sat 

Sun 

M 

T 

1. 

Read therapy notes 








2. 

Do a credit list 








3. 

Do a Thought Record 








4. 

Ask a question in class 









FIGURE 17.1. Sample daily checklist for homework assignments. 















310 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


As with any intervention, you should suggest these possibilities with 
a rationale and be sure that patients agree. 

Difficulty with an Assignment 

If you realize at a subsequent session that a homework assignment was 
too difficult or ill-dehned (common problems with novice therapists), 
take responsibility. Otherwise patients may unfairly criticize themselves 
for not having successfully completed an assignment: 

Therapist: Sally, now that we’ve talked about the problem you had 
with the homework, I can see that I didn’t explain it well enough 
to you. [Or, “I can see that it was really too hard.”] I’m sorry about 
that. What went through your mind when you couldn’t [or didn’t] 
do it? 

Here you have an opportunity to (1) model that you can make and 
admit to mistakes, (2) build rapport, (3) demonstrate that you are con¬ 
cerned with tailoring therapy—and homework assignments—to the 
patient, and (4) help patients see an alternative explanation for their 
lack of success. 

Psychological Problems 

If patients don’t do an assignment that was properly set up and which 
they had the opportunity to do, their difficulty may stem from one of 
the psychological factors described next. 

Negative Predictions 

When patients are in psychological distress, and particularly when they 
are depressed, they tend to assume negative outcomes. To identify dys¬ 
functional cognitions that interfered with doing a homework assign¬ 
ment, ask patients to recall a specific time they thought about doing the 
assignment and then elicit related cognitions and feelings: 

Therapist: Was there a time this week when you did think about read¬ 
ing the booklet on depression? 

PATIENT: Yes. I thought about it on and off. 

Therapist: Tell me about one of these times. Did you think about it 
last night, for example? 

PATIENT: Yeah. I was going to do it after dinner. 

Therapist: What happened? 


Homework 


311 


PATIENT: I don’t know. I just couldn’t make myself do it. 

Therapist: How were you feeling? 

Patient: Down, sad, kind of tired. 

Therapist: What was going through your mind as you thought about 
reading the booklet? 

PATIENT: This is hard. I probably won’t be able to concentrate. I won’t 
understand it. 

Therapist: Sounds like you were feeling pretty low. No wonder you 
were having trouble getting started. In fact, maybe we should have 
had you start reading it right in our session last week, {pause) I 
wonder how we could test this idea that you won’t be able to con¬ 
centrate and understand it. 

PATIENT: I guess I could try it. 

You might then ask patients to conduct an experiment right in session. 
Following a successful outcome, they might write down conclusions 
such as: “Sometimes my thoughts aren’t true and I can do more than I 
think. Next time I feel hopeless, I can do an experiment, like I did with 
the booklet.” (Note: If the experiment were unsuccessful, you would 
need to change the assignment to a more basic task.) 

Patients can test other negative predictions (such as, “My room¬ 
mate won’t want to go to that meeting with me,” or “I won’t understand 
the material even if I ask for help,” or “Doing homework will make me 
feel worse”) through behavioral experiments. Again, it is important to 
prepare patients for their reaction to a possible negative outcome. You 
can help patients evaluate other thoughts, such as, “I can’t do anything 
right,” or “I might fail this course,” with standard Socratic question¬ 
ing. 

When patients reveal ambivalence about the usefulness of doing 
an assignment, you should acknowledge that you do not know what the 
outcome will be: “I don’t know for sure that doing this assignment will 
help. What will you lose if it doesn’t work? What’s the potential gain in 
the long run if it does work?” Alternatively, you and the patient could 
list advantages and disadvantages of doing the homework. 

Finally, a patient may beneht from work at the belief level. Home¬ 
work may activate beliefs such as: 


“I’m incompetent.” 

“Having to do therapy homework means I’m defective.” 

“I shouldn’t have to put forth so much effort to feel better.” 
“My therapist is trying to control me.” 





312 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


“If I think about my problems, I’ll feel worse and worse.” 
“If I do homework and get better, my life will get worse.” 


These kinds of beliefs can be identibed and modibed through 
techniques described in Chapters 13 and 14. 

Overestimating the Demands of an Assignment 

Some patients overestimate how inconvenient or difficult it will be to 
do homework or do not realize that doing a therapy assignment will be 
time limited. 

Therapist: What could get in the way of your doing a Thought Record 
a few times this week? 

PATIENT: Tm not sure I’ll bnd the time. 

Therapist: How long do you think it will take each time? 

PATIENT: Not that long. Maybe 10 minutes. But I’m pretty rushed these 
days, you know. 1 do have a million things to do. 

You can then do straightforward problem solving to bnd possible time 
slots. Alternatively, you might propose an analogy, stressing that the 
inconvenience of doing assignments is time limited: 

Therapist: It certainly is true; you arevery busy these days. 1 wonder— 
this is an extreme example, 1 know—but what would you do if you 
had to take time every day to do something that would save your 
life [or your loved one’s life]? What would happen, for example, if 
you needed a blood transfusion every day? 

Patient: Well, of course I’d bnd the time. 

Therapist: Now, it’s obviously not life threatening if you don’t do this 
assignment, but the principle is the same. In a minute, we can talk 
specibcally about how you could cut back in another area, but brst 
it’s important to remember that this is not for the rest of your life. 
We just need you to rearrange some things for a little while until 
you’re feeling better. 

The patient who overestimates the energy an assignment benebts 
from similar questions. In the next example, the patient has a dysfunc¬ 
tional (and distorted) image of fulblling an assignment. 

Therapist: What could get in the way of your going to the mall every 
day this week? 

Patient: (Sighs.) I don’t know if I’ll have the energy. 





Homework 


313 


Therapist: What are you envisioning? 

PATIENT: Well, I can see dragging myself into one store after another. 

Therapist: You know, we talked about your going just for 10 minutes 
every day. How many stores would you actually get to in 10 minutes? 
1 wonder if you could he imagining that this assignment will he 
more difficult than we had planned? 

In a different situation, the patient has correctly recalled the assign¬ 
ment hut again overestimates the energy it will require. 1 hrst help specify 
the problem hy doing a modihed, short version of covert rehearsal. 

PATIENT: I’m not sure I’ll have the energy to take Max to the park for 
15 minutes. 

Therapist: Will the problem be mostly getting out of the house, going 
to the park, or what you’ll have to do at the park? 

PATIENT: Getting out of the house. 1 have to get so much stuff together— 
his diaper bag, the stroller, a bottle, his coat and boots ... 

[The therapist and patient then problem-solve; one solution 
is for her to gather all the necessities earlier in the day when she is 
feeling more energetic and less overwhelmed.] 

In a third situation, 1 simply set up the assignment as an experi¬ 
ment. 

PATIENT: I’m not sure I’ll have the energy to make the phone calls. 
Therapist: Since we’ve run short of time today, how about if we just set 
up this assignment as an experiment: Let’s write down your predic¬ 
tion—“1 won’t have enough energy to make the calls”—and next 
session, you can tell me how accurate it was. Is that okay? 

Perfectionism 

Many patients beneht from a simple reminder that they should not 
strive for perfection when doing homework: 

Therapist: Learning to identify your automatic thoughts is a skill, like 
learning the computer. You’ll get better with practice. So, if you 
have any trouble this week, don’t worry. We’ll hgure out how to do 
it better at our next session. 

Other patients with a strong underlying assumption about the 
necessity of being perfect may beneht from assignments that include 
mistakes: 


314 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: It sounds as if your belief about perfectionism is showing 
up in difficulty doing therapy homework. 

Patient: Yeah, it is. 

Therapist: How about this week if we have you do a Thought Record 
that is deliberately imperfect? You could do it with messy handwrit¬ 
ing or not do it thoroughly or make spelling mistakes. We should 
also put a 10-minute time limit on it. 

Psychological Obstacles Masked as Practical Problems 

Some patients propose that practical problems such as lack of time, 
energy, or opportunity may prevent them from carrying out an assign¬ 
ment. If you believe that a thought or belief is also interfering, you should 
investigate this possibility discussing the practical problem: 

Therapist: Okay, so you’re not sure you’ll be able to do this assign¬ 
ment [because of a practical problem]. Let’s pretend for a moment 
that this problem magically disappears. Now how likely are you do 
to the homework? Would anything else interfere? Any thoughts 
that would get in the way? 

Problems Related to the Therapist’s Cognitions 

Finally, you should assess whether any of your thoughts or beliefs hin¬ 
der you from assertively and appropriately encouraging a patient to do 
homework. Typical dysfunctional assumptions of therapists include: 


“I’ll hurt his feelings If I try to find out why he didn't do 
the homework.” 

“She’ll get angry if I [nicely] question her.” 

“He'll be insulted if I suggest he try a homework monitor.” 
“She doesn’t really need to do homework to get better.” 
“He is too overburdened now with other things.” 

“She’s too passive-aggressive to do homework.” 

“He's too fragile to expose himself to an anxious situation.” 


Ask yourself what goes through your mind when you think about 
assigning homework or exploring why a patient has not done home¬ 
work. If you are having dysfunctional thoughts, you might do Thought 
Records or behavioral experiments or consult a supervisor or peer. 
Remind yourself that you are not doing patients a favor if you allow 



Homework 


315 


them to skip homework (which research shows is important) and do not 
make extensive efforts to gain adherence. 


REVIEWING HOMEWORK 

Before each session, you should prepare by reviewing the notes of the 
previous session and noting the patient’s homework. A discussion of 
homework is typically the first item on the agenda, unless it is clearly 
inappropriate (e.g., the patient is grieving a recent, serious loss). Even 
if a patient is in crisis, it is still useful to spend a few minutes discuss¬ 
ing homework later in the session or, in a different case, to collabora- 
tively agree that the homework assigned at the previous session does 
not apply at the moment. 

Deciding how much time to spend reviewing homework and dis¬ 
cussing whether patients want to continue any assignment is part of the 
art of therapy. You will spend more time on homework when: 

• It covers an important, ongoing problem that requires further 
discussion. 

• Patients have not completed a task. 

• Youjudge that it is important to discuss what patients have learned 
or to help them reach a new understanding of their problems. 

For example, if severely depressed patients do not follow through with 
activity scheduling, you will likely spend significant time in session con¬ 
ceptualizing what happened and planning with them how they can be 
more successful in the coming week. Spending too little time reviewing 
homework may deprive patients of reinforcing important learning and 
skills. Spending too much time may deprive patients of discussing new 
problems thoroughly. 

The time you devote to a review of homework will vary. At the 
beginning of treatment, you will reinforce what was in the therapy notes 
(e.g., asking patients how much they believe the adaptive responses 
they wrote in the past session (s) and at home). You may need to review 
and allow patients to practice skills they did not quite grasp. You will 
also collaboratively decide which assignments a patient will continue or 
modify for the coming week. 

In summary, both you and your patients should view homework as 
an essential part of treatment. Homework, properly assigned and com¬ 
pleted, speeds progress and allows patients to practice the techniques 
of therapy which they will need when therapy is over. Kazantzis, Deane, 
Ronan, and Lampropoulos (2005) and Tompkins (2004) are helpful 
resources. 


Chapter 18 

^30 

TERMINATION AND 
RELAPSE PREVENTION 


T he goal in cognitive behavior therapy is to facilitate remission of 
patients’ disorders and to teach them skills they can use throughout 
their lifetime. The goal is not for you to solve all their problems. In fact, 
if you view yourself as responsible for helping patients with ever'^ prob¬ 
lem, you risk engendering or reinforcing dependence and you deprive 
patients of the opportunity to test and strengthen their skills. 

Therapy sessions are usually scheduled once a week, unless there 
are practical constraints. Patients with severe symptoms may benefit 
from more frequent sessions. Once patients have experienced a reduc¬ 
tion in symptoms and have learned basic skills, you may collaboratively 
agree to taper therapy gradually, on a trial basis, to once every 2 weeks 
and then to once every 3 to 4 weeks. In addition, patients are encour¬ 
aged to schedule “booster” sessions approximately 3, 6, and 12 months 
after termination. This chapter outlines steps to prepare patients for 
termination and possible relapse from the start of therapy to the final 
booster session. 


EARLY ACTIVITIES 

You will begin to prepare patients for termination and relapse even in 
the initial session, as you tell them that your goal is to make treatment 
as time limited as possible, with the aim of helping them become their 
own therapist. As soon as they start to feel better, it is important to 


316 


Termination and Reiapse Prevention 


317 


have a discussion about the course of recovery. Patients benefit from a 
visual depiction (Figure 18.1) of the course of progress, with periods of 
improvement that are typically interrupted (temporarily) by plateaus, 
fluctuations, or setbacks. (Later you will stress that life after therapy 
may be marked by occasional setbacks or difficulties but that patients 
will be better equipped to handle them on their own.) 

Therapist: I’m glad you’re feeling a little better. But 1 should tell you 
that you may still have ups and downs. Most people go along feel¬ 
ing a little better and a little better, then at some point, they reach 
a plateau or have a setback. Then they feel a little better and a little 
better, and then there may be another plateau or setback. So it’s 
normal to have ups and downs ... Can you see why it’s important to 
remember that in the future? 

PATIENT: I guess so I won’t worry so much about the down parts. 

Therapist: Exactly. You can remember this discussion where we pre¬ 
dicted some low points. In fact, you might want to refer to a graph 
[Figure 18.1]. This is a rough idea of what might happen. Do you 
see that the setbacks usually get fewer and shorter and generally 
less severe as time goes on? 

Patient: Uh-huh. 

Therapist: It’s important for you to remember this graph, because 
otherwise, when you have a setback, you might think that therapy 
doesn’t work, that you’ll never get better. 





V_y 


FIGURE 18.1. Progress in therapy. This graph, if skillfully drawn, can be made to 
resemble the southern border of the United States, with setbacks represented by 
“Texas” and “Florida.” While striking some patients and therapists as humorous, 
this illustration may help patients recall that setbacks are normal. 







318 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: You will probably have mild ups and downs even after 
therapy, because everyone does. Of course, by then, you’ll have 
the tools you need to help yourself. Or you may want to come in 
again for a session or two. We’ll discuss this toward the end of 
treatment. 

ACTIVITIES THROUGHOUT THERAPY 

Certain techniques should be used throughout treatment to facilitate 
relapse prevention. 

Attributing Progress to the Patient 

You should be alert at every session for opportunities to reinforce 
patients for their progress. When they experience an improvement in 
mood, find out why they think they are feeling better and reinforce the 
idea, whenever possible, that they have brought about changes in their 
mood by making changes in their thinking and behavior. 

Therapist: It sounds as if your level of depression is lower this week. 
Why do you think that happened? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Did you do anything differently this week? Did you go 
ahead and do the activities we scheduled? Or did you respond to 
your negative thoughts? 

PATIENT: Yeah. I actually exercised every day, and I went out with 
friends twice. A few times I really criticized myself but I read my 
coping cards. 

Therapist: Is it possible you’re feeling better this week because you 
did a number of things that helped? 

PATIENT: Yes, I think so. 

Therapist: So what can you say about how you made progress? 
PATIENT: I guess when I do things to help myself, I do feel better. 

Some patients initially believe that all the credit for feeling better 
goes to their therapist. An alternative attribution—that the patient is 
responsible for positive changes—can fortify the patient’s sense of self- 
efficacy. 


Termination and Reiapse Prevention 


319 


Therapist: Why do you think you’re feeling better this week? 

PATIENT: You really helped me last session. 

Therapist: Well, I may have taught you some things, hut who was it who 
actually changed your thinking and your behavior this week? 
PATIENT: I guess /did. 

Therapist: How much do you believe, then, that it’s really you who 
deserves the credit? 

Alternatively, patients may attribute all the improvement to a change 
in circumstance (e.g., “I’m feeling better because my boyfriend called 
me”) or to medication. While you should acknowledge such external 
factors, you should also ask about changes in their thinking or behavior 
that could have contributed to or helped maintain their improvement. 
When patients persist in believing that they do not deserve credit, you 
might decide to elicit their underlying belief (“What does it mean to 
you that I’m trying to give you credit?”). 

Teaching and Using Toois/Techniques Learned in Therapy 

When teaching patients techniques and tools, you will stress that these 
are lifelong aids the patient can use in a number of situations now and 
in the future—that is, these techniques are not specihc to just one dis¬ 
order such as depression, but they can be used whenever patients real¬ 
ize they are reacting in an overly emotional or dysfunctional way. Com¬ 
mon techniques and tools that can be used during and after therapy 
include the following: 


1. Breaking down big problems into manageable components. 

2. Brainstorming solutions to problems. 

3. Identifying, testing, and responding to automatic thoughts and 
beliefs. 

4. Using Thought Records. 

5. Monitoring and scheduling activities. 

6. Doing relaxation exercises. 

7. Using distraction and refocusing techniques. 

8. Creating hierarchies of avoided tasks or situations. 

9. Writing credit lists. 

10. Identifying advantages and disadvantages (of specific thoughts, 
beliefs, behaviors, or choices when making a decision). 



320 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


You should help patients understand how they can use these tools 
in other situations during and after therapy: 

Therapist: So identifying your depressing thoughts and then ques¬ 
tioning and responding to them really reduced how sad you felt? 

PATIENT: Yes, it did. I was surprised. 

Therapist: Did you know you could use these same tools whenever 
you feel you’re overreacting—when you think you feel more anger, 
anxiety, sadness, embarrassment, and so forth—than the situation 
calls for? 

PATIENT: I hadn’t really thought about it. 

Therapist: Now, I’m not saying you should try to get rid of all nega¬ 
tive emotion—only when you think you might be overreacting. Can 
you think of any other situations that came up in the last few weeks 
where it might have helped to use a Thought Record? 

PATIENT: {Pauses.) Nothing really comes to mind. 

Therapist: Any situations coming up in the next few weeks where it 
might be helpful to use a Thought Record? 

PATIENT: {Pauses.) Well, I know I’m going to be really angry at my 
brother if he decides to stay at school for the summer instead of 
coming home. 

Therapist: What do you think of doing a Thought Record on this situ¬ 
ation, writing down and then responding to your thoughts? 

Patient: Okay. 

Preparing for Setbacks during Therapy 

As soon as patients begin to feel better, you will prepare them for a 
potential setback by asking them to imagine what will go through their 
mind if they start to feel worse. Common responses include: “I shouldn’t 
be feeling this way”; “This means I’m not getting better”; “I’m hopeless”; 
“I’ll never get well”; “My therapist will be disappointed”; or “My thera¬ 
pist isn’t doing a good job”; “Cognitive behavior therapy doesn’t work 
for me”; “I’m doomed to be depressed forever”; “It was only a fluke that 
I felt better initially”; or patients may report an image of themselves in 
the future, for example, feeling frightened, alone, sad, huddled in the 
corner of their bed. Coping cards and the Progress in Therapy graph 
(Figure 18.1) can help avoid these negative cognitions. 


Termination and Reiapse Prevention 


321 


Therapist: Well, you’ve really been making nice progress. Your depres¬ 
sion seems to be lifting quite a bit. 

PATIENT: I am feeling better. 

Therapist: Do you remember that we talked about setbacks a couple 
of weeks ago? 

Patient: A little. 

Therapist: Since it’s possible you could have a setback, I’d like to dis¬ 
cuss in advance how you could handle it. 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: I’d like you to imagine for a moment that you’ve had a 
bad week. Nothing seems to have gone well. Everything looks black 
again. You’re really down on yourself. It seems hopeless. Can you 
get a picture of that in your mind? 

PATIENT: Yes. It’s like it was before therapy. 

Therapist: Okay. Tell me what’s going through your mind now. 

PATIENT: {Pauses.) It’s not fair. I was doing so well. This isn’t work¬ 
ing. 

Therapist: Good. Now, how can you answer these thoughts? 

PATIENT: I’m not sure. 

Therapist: Well, you have a choice. You can continue to think these 
depressing thoughts. If you do, what do you predict will happen to 
your mood? 

PATIENT: I’ll probably feel worse. 

Therapist: Or you can remind yourself that this is only a setback, 
which is normal and temporary. Then how would you feel? 

PATIENT: Better, probably, or at least not worse. 

Therapist: Okay. Having reminded yourself that setbacks are normal, 
what kinds of things have you learned to do in the past few weeks 
that could help you? 

PATIENT: I could read my therapy notes or get my mind off of it by con¬ 
centrating on what I have to do. 

Therapist: Or both. 

Patient: Right, or both. 

Therapist: Is there a reason to expect that the tools which helped you 
before won’t help you again? 


322 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 
Patient: No. 

Therapist: So you can respond to your negative thoughts and start 
concentrating on something else. Do you think it’s worth writing 
down what we just talked about—so you’ll have a plan in case you 
do have a setback at some point? 


NEAR TERMINATION ACTIVITIES 

Responding to Concerns about Tapering Sessions 

Several weeks before termination, you should discuss tapering ses¬ 
sions, as an experiment, from once a week to once every other week. 
Although some patients readily agree to this arrangement, others may 
become anxious. It is useful for this latter group of patients to list ver¬ 
bally and perhaps record in writing the advantages of trying to reduce 
the frequency of visits. When patients fail to see advantages, you should 
first elicit disadvantages, use guided discovery to help patients identify 
advantages, and then help them reframe the disadvantages (see Figure 
18 . 2 ). 


Advantages of tapering therapy 

1. I’ll have more opportunity to use and sharpen my tools. 

2. I’ll be less dependent on [my therapist]. 

3. I can use the therapy fee for other things. 

4. I can spend more time [doing other things]. 


Disadvantages Reframe 

1. I might relapse. If I’m going to relapse, it’s better for it to 

happen while I’m still in therapy so I can learn 
how to handle it. 


2. I may not be able to solve Tapering therapy gives me the chance to 
problems myself. test my idea that I need [my therapist]. In 

the long run, it's better for me to learn to 
solve problems myself, because I won’t be in 
therapy forever. 


3. I’ll miss [my therapist]. This is probably true, but I’ll be able to tolerate 

it and it will encourage me to build up a 
support network. 




FIGURE 18.2. Advantages and disadvantages (to Sally) of tapering therapy. 



Termination and Reiapse Prevention 


323 


The following transcript illustrates how such a discussion might 

proceed: 

Therapist: In our last session, we briefly discussed the possibility of 
experimenting with spacing our therapy sessions. Did you think 
about going to an every-other-week schedule on a trial basis? 

PATIENT: I did. It made me a little anxious. 

Therapist: What went through your mind? 

PATIENT: Oh, what if something happens that I can’t deal with? What if 
I start getting more depressed—I couldn’t stand that. 

Therapist: Did you evaluate these thoughts? 

Patient: Yeah. I realized I was catastrophizing, that it wasn’t the abso¬ 
lute end of therapy. And you did say I could call you if I needed 
to. 

Therapist: That’s right. Did you imagine a specific situation that might 
come up that would be difficult? 

PATIENT: No, not really. 

Therapist: Maybe it would help if we had you imagine a specific prob¬ 
lem now. 

PATIENT: Okay. [Sally imagines getting a low grade on a test, identifies 
her automatic thoughts, responds to the thoughts, and makes a 
specific plan for what to do next.] 

Therapist: Now, let’s talk about the second automatic thought you 
had about spacing our sessions—that you’d get more depressed 
and that you wouldn’t be able to stand it. 

PATIENT: I guess that may not be quite true. You’ve made me realize 
that I could stand to feel bad again. But I wouldn’t like it. 

Therapist: Okay. Now let’s say you do get more depressed and it’s still a 
week and a half before our next session. What can you do? 

PATIENT: Well, I can do what I did about a month ago. Reread my 
therapy notes, make sure I stay active, do more Thought Records. 
Somewhere in my notes I have a list of things to do. 

Therapist: Would it be helpful to find that list now? 

Patient: Yeah. 

Therapist: Okay. How about for homework if you find the list and 
write a Thought Record for these two thoughts: “Something might 
happen that I couldn’t deal with,” and “I couldn’t stand it if I got 
more depressed.” 

Patient: Okay. 


324 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Therapist: Any other thoughts about spacing our sessions? 

PATIENT: Just that I’d miss not having you to talk to every week. 

Therapist: I’ll miss that, too. Is there anyone else you could talk to, 
even a little? 

PATIENT: Well, I could call Rebecca. And I guess I could call my 
brother. 

Therapist: That sounds like a good idea. Do you want to write that 
down to do, too? 

Patient: Okay. 

Therapist: And hnally, do you remember that we said we could experi¬ 
ment with every-other-week sessions? If it’s not working well, I do 
want you to call me so you can come in sooner. 

Responding to Concerns about Termination 

When patients are doing well with biweekly sessions, you might suggest 
scheduling the next appointment for 3 or 4 weeks in the future, in prep¬ 
aration for termination. Again, tapering can be viewed as an experi¬ 
ment. At each succeeding session, you and the patient agree either to 
continue spacing sessions or to return to more frequent sessions. 

As termination approaches, it is important to elicit patients’ auto¬ 
matic thoughts about termination. Some patients are excited and hope¬ 
ful. At the other extreme, some patients are fearful or even angry. Most 
have some mixed feelings. They are pleased with their progress but 
concerned about relapse. Often they are sorry to end their relationship 
with you. 

It is important both to acknowledge what patients are feeling and 
help them respond to any distortions. It is often desirable for you to 
express your own genuine feelings, if you can honestly say that you regret 
the (gradual) ending of the relationship but feel pride in what they 
have achieved in therapy and that you believe they are ready to make it 
on their own. Responding to other automatic thoughts and examining 
advantages and disadvantages of termination can be carried out in the 
same way as was previously described in responding to thoughts about 
tapering sessions. Additional strategies to help patients who are con¬ 
cerned about termination can be found in Ludgate (2009). 

Reviewing What Was Learned in Therapy 

You will encourage patients to read through and organize their notes so 
they can easily refer to them in the future. For example, a good home- 


Termination and Reiapse Prevention 


325 


work assignment is to write a synopsis of the important points and skills 
they learned in treatment. 

Self-Therapy Sessions 

Although many patients do not follow through with formal self-therapy 
sessions, it is nevertheless useful to discuss a self-therapy plan (see Fig¬ 
ure 18.3) and to encourage its use. When patients try self-therapy ses¬ 
sions while regular therapy sessions are still being tapered, they are 
much more likely to do self-therapy after termination. And they can 
discover potential problems: not having enough time, misunderstand¬ 
ings about what to do, and interfering thoughts (e.g., “This is too much 
work”; “I don’t really need to do it”; “I can’t do it on my own”). In addi¬ 
tion to helping patients respond to these problems, you can remind 
patients of the advantages of self-therapy sessions: They are continuing 
therapy, but at their own convenience and without charge; they can 
keep their newly acquired tools fresh and ready to use; they can resolve 
difficulties before they become major problems; they reduce the pos¬ 
sibility of relapse; and they can use their skills to enrich their life in a 
variety of contexts. 

A generic self-therapy plan is presented in Figure 18.3. You can 
review it with patients and tailor it to meet their needs. Many patients 
beneht from a brief discussion of a reminder system: “Initially, you 
might want to try a self-therapy session once a week, then taper it to 
once or twice a month, then to once a season, and eventually, to once 
a year. How could you remind yourself to pull out this self-therapy plan 
periodically?” 

Preparing for Setbacks after Termination 

As mentioned previously, you begin preparing patients for setbacks early 
in treatment. As you near termination, you should encourage them to 
compose a coping card specifying what to do if a setback occurs after 
therapy has ended. (See Figure 18.4 for a typical card.) 

It is desirable for patients to attempt to resolve their difficulties 
on their own before calling you. If they do need another appointment, 
you can help them discover what got in the way of their handling the 
setback or problem independently, and together you can plan what the 
patient can do differently in the future. 


f \ 

1. Review of past week(s) 

• What positive things have happened? What do I deserve credit for? 

• What problems came up? What did I do? If the problem recurs, what, if 
anything, should I do differently? 

2. Review of homework 

• Did 1 do what 1 had planned? If not, what got In the way (practical 
problems; automatic thoughts), and what can I do about that next 
time? 

• What should I continue to do this week? 

3. Current probiematic issues/situations 

• Am 1 viewing this problem realistically, or have 1 been overreacting? Is 
there another way of viewing this? 

• What should 1 do? 

4. Prediction of future probiems 

• What problems may come up In the next few days or weeks, and what 
should I do about them? 

5. Set new homework 

• What homework would be helpful? Should I consider: 
o Doing Thought Records? 

o Scheduling pleasure or mastery activities? 
o Reading therapy notes? 
o Practicing skills such as relaxation? 
o Doing a credit list? 

6. Schedute the next seif-therapy appointment 

V_ J 


FIGURE 18.3. Guide to self-therapy sessions. From Cognitive behavior theiapy worksheet 
packet. Copyright 2011 by Judith S. Beck. Bala Cynwyd, PA: Beck Institute for Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy. 


Reprinted by permission in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, Second Edition, by Judith 
S. Beck (Guilford Press, 2011). Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of 
this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers may download a larger 
version of this material from www.guilfoid.com/p/beckd. 


326 




Termination and Reiapse Prevention 


327 





What I can do in case of a setback: 

1. 1 have a choice. 1 can catastrophize about the setback, get myself 

all upset, think things are hopeless, and probably feel worse. Or 1 

can look back over my therapy notes, remember that setbacks 

are a normal part of recovery, and see what 1 can learn from this 

setbaok. Doing these things will probably make me feel better and 

make the setback less severe. 

2. Next, 1 should have a self-therapy session and plan what to do 

to solve my problems. 

3. 1 should oall [a specific friend or family member] if 1 need more help. 

4. 1 can call [my therapist] to briefly discuss what to do or to 

schedule another session. 



V_y 


FIGURE 18.4. Sally’s coping card about setbacks. 

BOOSTER SESSIONS 

You should encourage patients to schedule booster sessions after ter¬ 
mination for several reasons. If any difficulties have arisen, you can 
discuss how patients handled them and assess whether they could have 
handled them in a better way. Together you can look ahead to the next 
several weeks and months and predict future difficulties that could 
arise. Then you can jointly formulate a plan to deal with these situa¬ 
tions. Knowing that you will ask them about their progress doing self¬ 
therapy may motivate patients to do their cognitive behavior therapy 
homework and practice their skills. In addition, you can help patients 
determine whether their previously modihed dysfunctional beliefs have 
been reactivated. If so, they can do cognitive restructuring in session 
and plan for continued belief work at home. 

Booster sessions also afford you the opportunity to check on the 
reemergence of dysfunctional strategies (such as avoidance). Patients 
can express any new or previously unaccomplished goals and develop a 
plan to work toward them. Together you can evaluate their self-therapy 
program and modify as needed. Finally, when patients know they are 
scheduled for booster sessions after termination, their anxiety about 
maintaining progress on their own is usually alleviated. 



















328 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


To prepare for booster sessions, you may provide patients with a list 

of questions (see Figure 18.5). 

As the following transcript indicates, the overall goal for the booster 

session is to check on the patient’s well-being and plan for continued 

maintenance or progress. 

Therapist: Tm glad you were able to come in today. It looks like, from 
the Beck Depression Inventory, that you’re a little more depressed 
than the last time we met. Is that right? 

PATIENT: Yes, my girlfriend recently broke up with me. 

Therapist: I’m sorry to hear that. Do you think that situation accounted 
for the rise in your score? 

Patient: I think so. I was feeling pretty good until last week. 

Therapist: Is the breakup something you’d like to put on the agenda 
to talk about today? 

PATIENT: Yes, that and my progress, or rather lack of progress, in look¬ 
ing for a new job. 

Therapist: Okay. And I’d like to find out how things have been going 
for you generally, aside from the breakup: whether you encoun¬ 
tered any other rough spots, how you dealt with them, how much 
cognitive behavior therapy homework you were able to do, any dif¬ 
ficulties you think may arise in the next 2 or 3 months. Does that 
sound okay? 

Patient: Yes. 

Therapist: Would you like to start with the breakup? Can you tell me 
how it came about? {We briefly discuss the breakup. I am concerned with 
how the patient reacted to the breakup, whether his previous dysfunctional 
beliefs have become activated.) [summarizing] So things had begun to 
deteriorate, and she told you she wanted to start seeing other guys? 
When she told you that, what went through your mind? 

PATIENT: That she didn’t really love me. 

Therapist: And what did that mean to you, that she didn’t love you? 

PATIENT: That there must be something wrong with me. 

Therapist: And what did you think was wrong with you? 

PATIENT: That I’m not very lovable. 

Therapist: How much did you believe that you weren’t very lovable 
right when she told you she wanted to see other men? 

Patient: Oh, about 90% 

Therapist: And how much do you believe it now? 


1. Schedule ahead—make definite appointments, if possible, and call to 
confirm. 


2. Consider coming as a preventive measure, even if you have been 
maintaining your progress. 


3. Prepare before you come. Decide what would be helpful to discuss, 
including: 


a. What has gone well for you? 


b. What problems arose? How did you handle them? Was there a better 
way of handling them? 


c. What problem(s) could arise between this booster session and your 
next booster session? Imagine the problem in detail. What automatic 
thoughts might you have? What beliefs might be activated? How will 
you deal with the automatic thoughts/beliefs? How will you problem- 
solve? 


d. What cognitive behavior therapy work did you do? What cognitive 
behavior therapy work would you like to do between now and the 
next booster session? What automatic thoughts might get in the way 
of doing the cognitive behavior therapy work? How will you answer 
these thoughts? 


e. What further goals do you have for yourself? How will you achieve 
them? How can the things you learned In cognitive behavior therapy 
help? 


V_y 


FIGURE 18.5. Guide to booster sessions. From Cognitive behavior therapy worksheet packet. 
Copyright 2011 byjudith S. Beck. Bala Cynwyd, PA: Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior 
Therapy. 


Reprinted by permission in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, Second Edition, byjudith 
S. Beck (Guilford Press, 2011). Permission to photocopy this material is granted to purchasers of 
this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers may download a larger 
version of this material from www.guilfoi'd.com/p/beckd. 


329 




330 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Patient: Less, maybe 50%, 60%. 

Therapist: What made the difference? 

Patient: Well, part of me knows that we probably just weren’t right for 
each other. 

Therapist: So you were able to modify this old idea of not being lov¬ 
able? 

PATIENT: Somewhat. 

Therapist: Right. Now what did you learn from therapy that you can 
do to damp down this unlovable idea further and strengthen the 
idea that you are lovable? 

PATIENT: A Thought Record might help. And I know my therapy notes 
have a lot on it. I should have gone back and reread them. 
Therapist: That might have helped. Did you think of doing that? 
PATIENT: Yeah. I guess I thought it really wouldn’t help. 

Therapist: What do you think now? 

Patient: Well, it helped me before, it should help me again. 

Therapist: What would get in the way of going home and doing some 
work on it in the next couple of days? 

PATIENT: Nothing. I’ll do it. I think it probably will help. 

Therapist: Now might this thought, “It won’t help,” pop up again the 
next time you’re going through a rough spot? 

Patient: It might. 

Therapist: What could you do now so it would be more likely that 
you’d test that thought? 

PATIENT: What could I do now? 

Therapist: Yes. What could you do to remind yourself that you had the 
thought this time and then realized it might not be true? 

PATIENT: I should write it down, maybe on a paper I keep in my desk. 
Therapist: Okay, how about if you write down some of the things we 
just talked about—doing a Thought Record on being unlovable, 
reading through your therapy notes, writing a response to the 
thought “It won’t help.” 

In this portion of the booster session, I assess the patient’s level of 
depression, set the agenda, discuss an issue, and help him set home¬ 
work for himself. I ascertain that he has only mild depressive symp¬ 
toms that seem primarily related to the breakup of the relationship. 
(Had the depression been more severe, I would have spent more time 
assessing triggers and identifying and modifying dysfunctional beliefs. 


Termination and Reiapse Prevention 


331 


thoughts, and behaviors. We would also have discussed the advisability 
of additional sessions.) 

This patient is easily able to express his automatic thoughts and 
underlying belief. He and I spend little time developing a plan to help 
him modify his ideas; he had already learned the tools during therapy. 
He needed the booster session to remind and motivate himself to use 
the tools. 

In summary, relapse prevention is carried out throughout therapy. 
Problems in tapering sessions and in termination are addressed as any 
other problems, with a combination of problem solving and responding 
to dysfunctional thoughts and beliefs. 


Chapter 19 

TREATMENT PLANNING 


A t any given moment in therapy, how do you decide what to say or do 
next? Partial answers to this question have been provided through¬ 
out this book, but this chapter provides a more comprehensive frame¬ 
work for making decisions and planning treatment. To keep therapy 
focused and moving in the right direction, you continually ask yourself, 
“What is the specihc problem here, and what am I trying to accom¬ 
plish?” You are cognizant of your objectives in the current portion of 
the session, in the session as a whole, in the current stage of therapy, 
and in treatment as a whole. This chapter outlines a number of areas 
essential to effective treatment planning: 


• Accomplishing broad therapeutic goals. 

• Planning treatment across sessions. 

• Devising treatment plans. 

• Planning individual sessions. 

• Deciding whether to focus on a problem. 

• Modifying standard treatment for specific disorders. 


332 



Treatment Planning 


333 


ACCOMPLISHING BROAD THERAPEUTIC GOALS 

At the broadest level, your objectives are not only to facilitate a remis¬ 
sion of patients’ disorders but also to prevent relapse. To do the latter, 
you tell patients early in treatment that one of your goals is to teach 
them to become their own therapist. To achieve your objectives, you 
will: 


1. Build a sound therapeutic alliance with patients. 

2. Make the structure and the process of therapy explicit. 

3. Teach patients the cognitive model and share your 
conceptualization with them. 

4. Help alleviate their distress through a variety of techniques and 
problem solving. 

5. Teach them how to use these techniques themselves, help them 
generalize the use of the techniques, and motivate them to use the 
techniques in the future. 


PLANNING TREATMENT ACROSS SESSIONS 

You develop a general plan for treatment and a specihc plan for each 
individual session. Therapy can be viewed in three phases. In the 
beginning phase of treatment, you build a strong therapeutic alliance; 
identify and specify patients’ goals for therapy; solve problems; teach 
patients the cognitive model; get patients behaviorally activated (if 
they are depressed and withdrawn); educate patients about their dis¬ 
order; teach them to identify, evaluate, and respond to their automatic 
thoughts; socialize them (to do homework, set an agenda in therapy, 
and provide feedback); and instruct patients in coping strategies. In 
this hrst phase of therapy, you often take the lead in suggesting home¬ 
work assignments. 

In the middle phase of therapy, you continue working toward these 
objectives but also emphasize identifying, evaluating, and modifying 
patients’ beliefs. You share your conceptualization of patients with them 
and use both “intellectual” and “emotional” techniques to facilitate 
belief modihcation. You teach patients the skills they need to accom¬ 
plish their goals. 

In the hnal phase of therapy, the emphasis shifts to preparing for 
termination and preventing relapse. By this point, patients have become 



334 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


much more active in therapy, taking the lead in setting the agenda, 
suggesting solutions to problems, taking therapy notes, and devising 
homework assignments. 


CREATING A TREATMENT PLAN 

You develop a treatment plan based on your evaluation of patients, their 
Axis I and Axis II symptoms and disorder (s), and their specihc present¬ 
ing problems and goals. Sally, for example, set hve goals in the hrst 
therapy session: to improve her schoolwork, decrease her anxiety about 
tests, spend more time with friends, join school activities, and have 
more fun. Based on her intake evaluation and these goals, I devised a 
general therapy plan (see Figure 19.1). In each session, we worked on 
several of the areas specihed in the plan based on what we had covered 
in the previous session(s), what Sally had done for homework, and what 
problems or topics Sally put on the agenda that day. You also take each 
individual problem or goal and do a critical analysis, either mentally or 
on paper (Figure 19.2). 

Having formulated a general treatment plan, you adhere to it to 
a greater or lesser degree, revising it as necessary. Analyzing specihc 
problems compels you to conceptualize patients’ difficulties in detail 
and to formulate a treatment plan tailored for them. Doing so also 
helps you focus each session, grasp the flow of therapy from one session 
to the next, and become more cognizant of progress. 


r X 

1. Problem-solve how to improve her concentration, seek needed heip in her 
courses, scheduie time with friends, and join activities. 

2. Heip her identify, evaiuate, and respond to automatic thoughts about 
herseif, schooi, other peopie, and therapy, especiaiiy those that are 
particuiariy distressing and/or hinder her from soiving probiems. 

3. investigate dysfunctionai beiiefs about perfectionism and seeking heip 
from others. 

4. Discuss her seif-criticism and increase giving herseif credit. 

5. Increase productive activity. 

V _!_ J 


FIGURE 19.1. Sally’s treatment plan. 



Treatment Planning 


335 


Problem Analysis 

A. Typical Problem Situations 



B. Dysfunctional Behaviors 

Keeps going over and over same material when comprehension is poor or 
stops studying altogether. 

Fails to respond to automatic thoughts. 

Doesn't ask others for help. 

C. Cognitive Distortions 

Attributes problem to weakness in self rather than to depression. 

Assumes future is hopeless. 

Assumes she is helpless and can’t do anything about the problem. 

Possibly eguates her worth with her achievement? 

D. Therapeutic Strategies 

1. Do problem-solving. Switch to another subject if comprehension is low 
after a second reading. Devise a plan to get formal or informal help from 
professors, teaching assistant, tutor, or classmate. Compose coping cards 
in session to be read before and during studying. 

2. Monitor moods and behavior. Jot down automatic thoughts when mood 
gets worse or when she avoids. 

(cont.) 

\ _ J 


FIGURE 19.2. Analysis of Problem 1: Difficulty studying. 











































336 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


r ^ 

3. Use Socratic questioning to evaiuate automatic thoughts. Teach use of 
Thought Record. 

4. Use guided discovery to uncover meaning of automatic thoughts; put in 
conditionai (if... then ...) format and test. 

5. If applicable, use cognitive continuum to illustrate that achievement is on a 
continuum, rather than consisting of either perfection or failure. 

V_V 


FIGURE 19.2. (cont.) 


PLANNING INDIVIDUAL SESSIONS 

Before and during a session, you ask yourself a number of questions 
to formulate an overall plan for the session and to guide you as you 
conduct the therapy session. At the most general level, you ask yourself, 
“What am I trying to accomplish, and how can I do so most efficiently?” 
Experienced therapists automatically reflect on many specific issues. 
The following list of questions, while potentially daunting to the begin¬ 
ner, is a useful guide for more advanced therapists who wish to improve 
their ability to make better decisions about how to proceed within a 
therapy session. The list is designed to be read and considered before 
a therapy session as conscious contemplation of the questions during a 
session would undoubtedly interfere with the therapeutic process. 

1. As you review your notes from the previous session before the session, 

you ask yourself: 

a. “What is the patient’s disorder(s)? How, if at all, does standard 
cognitive behavior therapy need to be varied for treatment of 
this disorder and this patient in particular?” 

b. “How have I conceptualized the patient’s difficulties? How, if at 
all, does standard cognitive behavior therapy need to be varied 
for this particular patient?” 

c. “At which stage of therapy are we (beginning, middle, final)? 
How many sessions do we have left (if there is a limit)?” 

d. “What progress have we made so far in the patient’s mood, 
behavior, symptoms? Toward the patient’s goals and major prob¬ 
lems?” 

e. “How strong is our therapeutic alliance? What, if anything, do I 
need to do today to strengthen it?” 

f. “At which cognitive level have we primarily been working: auto¬ 
matic thoughts, intermediate beliefs, core beliefs, or a mixture? 
How much progress have we made at each level?” 



Treatment Planning 


337 


g. “What behavioral changes have we been working toward? How 
much progress have we made?” 

h. “What happened in the last few therapy sessions? What dysfunc¬ 
tional ideas or problems (if any) have hindered therapy? What 
skills have we been working on? Which one(s) do I want to rein¬ 
force? Which new skills do I want to teach?” 

i. “What happened in the last session? What homework did the 
patient agree to do? What, if anything, did I agree to do (e.g., 
call patient’s health care provider or hnd relevant bibliother- 
apy)?” 

2. As you begin the therapy session and check on the patient’s mood, 

you ask yourself: 

a. “How has the patient been feeling since our last session com¬ 
pared to earlier in treatment? Which moods predominate (e.g., 
sadness, hopelessness, anxiety, anger, shame)?” 

b. “Do objective scores match the patient’s subjective description? 
If not, why not?” 

c. “Is there anything about the patient’s mood we should put on 
the agenda to discuss more fully?” 

3. As the patient provides a brief reviao of the week, you ask yourself: 

a. “How did this week go compared to previous weeks?” 

b. “What signs of progress are there? What positive experiences 
did the patient have?” 

c. “What problems came up this week?” 

d. “Did anything happen this week (positive or negative) that we 
should put on the agenda to discuss more fully?” 

4. As you check on the patient’s use of alcohol, drugs, and medication (if 

applicable), you ask yourself: 

a. “Is there a problem in any of these areas? If so, should we put it 
on the agenda to discuss more fully?” 

5. As you and the patient set the agenda, you ask yourself: 

a. “Which problem is most important to the patient? Which is the 
most solvable? Which one is likely to bring about symptom relief 
within today’s session and in the coming week?” 

6. As you and the patient prioritize agenda items, you ask yourself: 

a. “How much time will each agenda item take? How many items 
can we discuss?” 

b. “Are there any problems the patient could resolve alone, or with 


338 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


someone else, or bring up at another session? How much time 
should we allot to each chosen item/problem?” 

7. As you and the patient review the homework, you ask yourself: 

a. “How is the patient’s homework related to the agenda items? 
Should discussion of any of the homework tasks be postponed 
until we get to a specific agenda item?” 

b. “How much of the homework did the patient do? What, if any¬ 
thing, got in the way?” 

c. “How much does the patient agree with each statement in the 
therapy notes from last week? In therapy notes from previous 
weeks (if still relevant)? How relevant are the therapy notes to 
the problems on today’s agenda?” 

d. “Was the homework useful? If not, why not? If so, what did the 
patient learn?” 

e. “Which homework tasks (if any) would be beneficial for the 
patient to continue in the coming week?” 

f. “How, if at all, should we modify homework assigned in this ses¬ 
sion to make it more effective?” 

8. As you and the patient discuss the first agenda item, you ask yourself 

questions in four areas: 

Defining the Problem 

a. “What is the specific problem?” 

b. “In which specific situations did the problem arise? If it arose 
more than once, in which situation did the patient feel most 
upset or behave most dysfunctionally?” 

c. “Why does the patient believe he has this problem? Why do / 
think the patient has this problem?” 

d. “How does this problem fit into the overall cognitive conceptual¬ 
ization of the patient? How does it relate to his overall goals?” 

Devising a Strategy 

a. “What has the patient already done to try to solve the prob¬ 
lem?” 

b. “What would / do if /were in the patient’s position and had this 
problem?” 

c. “Can we do outright problem solving? What thoughts and beliefs 
might interfere with problem solving or carrying out a solution?” 

Choosing Techniques 

a. “What specifically am I trying to accomplish as we discuss this 
agenda item?” 


Treatment Planning 


339 


b. “Which techniques have worked well for this patient (or for 
similar patients) in the past? Which techniques have networked 
well?” 

c. “Which technique should I try first?” 

d. “How will I evaluate its effectiveness?” 

e. “Will I employ the technique or employ it and teach it to the 
patient?” 

Monitoring the Process 

a. “Are we working together as a team?” 

b. “Is the patient having interfering automatic thoughts about him¬ 
self, this technique, our therapy, me, the future?” 

c. “Is the patient’s mood lifting? How well is this technique work¬ 
ing? Should I try something else?” 

d. “Will we finish discussion of this agenda item in time? If not, 
should we collaboratively decide to continue this item and cur¬ 
tail or eliminate discussion of another item?” 

e. “What follow-up (i.e., homework assignment) might be benefi¬ 
cial?” 

f. “What should we record for the patient to review at home?” 

9. Following discussion of the first agenda item, you ask yourself: 

a. “How is the patient feeling now?” 

b. “Do I need to do anything to reestablish rapport?” 

c. “How much time is left in the session? Do we have time for 
another agenda item? What should we do next?” 

10. Before closing the session, you ask yourself: 

a. “Did we make progress? Is the patient feeling better?” 

b. “Is the patient committed to doing the homework we agreed 
on?” 

c. “Do I need to probe for negative feedback? If there was negative 
feedback, how should I address it?” 

11. After the session, you ask yourself: 

a. “How should I refine my conceptualization?” 

b. “What do I want to remember to address in the next session? 
Future sessions?” 

c. “Do I need to attend to our relationship?” 

d. “How would I score myself on each item of the Cognitive Ther¬ 
apy Rating Scale [Appendix C]? If I could do the session over 
again, what would I do differently?” 


340 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


DECIDING WHETHER TO FOCUS ON A PROBLEM 

A critical decision in every therapy session is which prohlem (or proh- 
lems) to pursue. Although you collaborate in making this decision with 
patients, you nevertheless guide therapy toward discussion of problems 
that are distressing and ongoing (or recurrent) and toward which you 
judge you will be able to make some progress during the session. You 
tend to limit discussion of problems that: 

• Patients can solve themselves, 

• Are isolated incidents unlikely to recur, and/or 

• Are not particularly distressing. 

Having identihed and specihed a problem, you do several things 
to help you decide how much time and effort to spend on the problem. 
You: 


1. Gather more data about the problem 

2. Review your options. 

3. Reflect on practical considerations. 

4. Use the stage of therapy as a guide. 

5. Change the focus when necessary. 


These hve steps are described below. 

Gathering More Data about a Problem 

When patients hrst bring up a problem or when the existence of a prob¬ 
lem becomes apparent in the midst of a session, you assess the nature 
of the problem to determine whether it seems worthwhile to intervene. 
For example, Sally has put a new problem on the agenda: Her father’s 
business is failing, and Sally feels sad. I question her to assess how use¬ 
ful it will be to devote a signihcant portion of therapy time to this prob¬ 
lem. 

Therapist: Okay, you said you wanted to bring up something about 
your dad and his business? 

PATIENT: Yeah. His business has been pretty rocky for a while, but now 
it looks as if it may go bankrupt. 

Therapist: [gathering more information] If it does go bankrupt, how 
will that affect you? 




Treatment Planning 


341 


PATIENT: Oh, nothing directly. I just feel so bad for him. I mean, he’ll 
still have enough money but... he’s worked really hard for this. 

Therapist: [trying to discover whether there is a distortion in Sally’s 
thinking] What do you think will happen if it does go bankrupt? 

PATIENT: Well, he’s already started looking for a new business. He’s not 
the type to just lie around or take time off. 

Therapist: [still assessing whether Sally is thinking dysfunctionally] 
What’s the worst part of this to you? 

Patient: Just that he probably feels bad. 

Therapist: How do you feel when you think about his feeling badly? 

Patient: Bad ... sad. 

Therapist: How sad? 

Patient: A medium amount, I guess. 

Therapist: [testing whether Sally can take a long view] Do you have a 
sense that though he may feel badly initially, he won’t stay that way 
indehnitely? That he’ll probably get involved in another business 
and feel better? 

PATIENT: Yeah, I think that’ll probably happen. 

Therapist: Do you think you’re feeling “normal” sadness over this? Or 
do you think this is affecting you too strongly? 

PATIENT: I think I’m having a normal reaction. 

Therapist: [having assessed no further work on this problem is war¬ 
ranted] Anything else on this? 

PATIENT: No, I don’t think so. 

Therapist: Okay. I’m sorry this happened to your dad. Let me know 
what happens. 

Patient: I will. 

Therapist: Should we turn to the next item on our agenda? 

In another situation, you determine that a problem does require 

intervention. 

Therapist: You wanted to talk about living arrangements for next 
year? 

PATIENT: Yes. I’m pretty upset. My roommate and I have decided to live 
together again. She wants to live off campus. So we have to look for 
an apartment in West Philly or Center City. But she’s going home 
for spring vacation so it’s mostly up to me to hnd a place. 

Therapist: When were you feeling the most upset about this? 


342 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


PATIENT: Yesterday, when I agreed to start looking while she was away... 
Actually, it was last night when I realized I didn’t know what to do. 

Therapist: How were you feeling? 

Patient: Overwhelmed ... anxious. 

Therapist: As you were thinking about this last night, what was going 
through your mind? 

PATIENT: What am I going to do? I don’t even know where to start. 

Therapist: [seeking a fuller picture; determining whether there were 
other important automatic thoughts] What else was going through 
your mind? 

PATIENT: I was feeling overwhelmed. I didn’t know what to do hrst, like 
should I go to a real estate agent? Should I look online? 

Therapist: [probing for additional thoughts] Were you having any 
thoughts about your roommate? 

PATIENT: No, not really. She said she’d help when she got back. She said 
I didn’t have to start looking until then. 

Therapist: Were you making any predictions? 

PATIENT: I don’t know. 

Therapist: [giving an opposite example] Well, were you thinking 
you’d easily hnd a great place with a cheap rent? 

PATIENT: No ... no, I was thinking, “What if I hnd a place and it turns 
out to be infested with cockroaches, or unsafe, or too noisy, or in 
really bad shape?” 

Therapist: Did you have an image like that in your mind? 

Patient: Yeah. Dark, smelly, dirty. {Shudders.) 

Reviewing the Options 

Now that I have a fuller picture, I mentally review my options. I could 

do one or more of the following: 

1. Engage Sally in straightforward problem solving, helping her 
decide which steps seem the most reasonable and feasible. 

2. Teach Sally problem-solving skills, using this problem as an 
example. 

3. Use this situation as an opportunity to reinforce the cognitive 
model. 

4. Use this situation as an opportunity to help Sally conceptualize her 
larger difficulty of assuming she Is Incompetent In a new situation 
and feeling overwhelmed Instead attesting this belief. 





Treatment Planning 


343 


5. Have Sally identify the most distressing thought and help her 
evaluate it. 

6. Teach Sally how to do a Thought Record using this situation. 

7. Use the image she described as an opportunity to teach her 
imagery techniques. 

8. Make a collaborative decision with Sally to move on to the 
next agenda Item (perhaps to an even more pressing problem) 
and to return to this problem later in the session or in a future 
session. 


Reflecting on Practical Considerations 

How do you decide which course to pursue? I took into account a num¬ 
ber of factors, including: 


1. What is likely to bring Sally substantial relief? 

2. What do we have time to do? What else do we need to do in the 
session? 

3. What skills would be valuable to teach or review with Sally for 
which this problem provides an opportunity? 

4. What, if anything, could Sally do herself (I.e., for homework) to 
relieve her distress? For example, if Sally could do a Thought 
Record on this at home, we can spend session time on other 
things that will speed her progress. 


Using the Stage of Therapy as a Guide 

You are often guided by a patient’s stage of therapy. For example, you 
may avoid tackling a complex (but non-emergency) problem in the brst 
few sessions with depressed patients if it is unlikely that you will make 
much headway toward solving it. Focusing on easier problem that are 
solvable, or partially solvable, engenders hope in patients and makes 
them more motivated to work in therapy. 

Changing the Focus in a Session 

Sometimes you can’t easily assess how difficult a problem will be or 
how likely it is that a particular discussion will activate a painful core 
belief. In these cases, you may initially focus on a problem but switch 
to another topic when you realize your interventions are not successful 






344 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


and/or the patient is experiencing greater (unintended) distress. Fol¬ 
lowing is a transcript from an early therapy session. 

Therapist: Okay, next on the agenda. You said you’d like to meet more 
people. {We discuss this goal more specifically.) Now, how could you 
meet new people this week? 

PATIENT: (in a meek voice) I could talk to people at work. 

Therapist: {noticing that the patient suddenly looks downcast) What’s going 
through your mind right now? 

PATIENT: It’s hopeless. I’ll never be able to do it. I’ve tried this before. 
{Appears angry.) All my other therapists have tried this, too. But, Tm 
telling you, I just can’t do it! It won’t work! 

I hypothesize from the patient’s sudden negative affect shift that a core 
belief has been activated. I recognize that continuing in the same vein 
at this time will likely be counterproductive. Instead of refocusing on 
the problem, I decide to repair the therapeutic alliance by eliciting the 
patient’s angry automatic thoughts (“When I asked you how you could 
meet more people this week, what went through your mind?”) and then 
helping her evaluate these thoughts. Later I gave the patient a choice 
about whether to return to this agenda item: 

Therapist: I’m glad you can see that I hadn’t intended to make you 
do things you’re not ready for. Now, would you like to return to the 
topic of meeting new people, or should we come back to it another 
time [at another session] and move on to the problem you had this 
week with your friend Elise? 

In summary, early in treatment you tend to guide discussion away 
from problems you are unlikely to be successful in solving or partially 
solving (if patients are agreeable to postponing discussion about them). 
At any point, you avoid focusing on problems that patients can resolve 
on their own, that they do not want to work on, or that are not particu¬ 
larly distressing to them. 


MODIFYING STANDARD TREATMENT 
FOR SPECIFIC DISORDERS 

It is essential that you have a solid understanding of patients’ current 
symptoms and functioning, presenting problems, precipitating events, 
history, and diagnosis before starting therapy. You will need to con¬ 
sult specialized texts for patients whose primary disorder is not a sim- 


Treatment Planning 


345 


pie, unipolar depression to educate yourself about key cognitions and 
behavioral strategies for the various psychiatric disorders. 

In summary, effective treatment planning requires a sound diagno¬ 
sis, a solid formulation of the case in cognitive terms, and consideration 
of the patient’s characteristics and problems. Treatment is tailored to 
the individual; you develop an overall strategy as well as a specific plan 
for each session, considering the following: 


1. Patients'diagnosis(es). 

2. A conceptualization of their difficulties (which you check out with 
patients for accuracy). 

3. Their goals for therapy. 

4. Their most pressing concerns. 

5. Your goals for therapy. 

6. The stage of treatment. 

7. Patients' learning characteristics, their stage of life, developmental 
and intellectual level, gender, and cultural background. 

8. Patients' level of motivation. 

9. The nature and strength of the therapeutic alliance. 


You develop and continually modify a general plan for treatment 
across sessions and a more specific plan before each session and within 
each session. 



Chapter 20 

PROBLEMS IN THERAPY 


P roblems of one kind or another arise with nearly every patient in 
cognitive behavior therapy. Even experienced therapists encoun¬ 
ter difficulties at times in establishing a therapeutic alliance, correctly 
conceptualizing a patient’s difficulties, or consistently working toward 
joint objectives. A reasonable goal is not to avoid problems altogether 
but rather to learn to uncover and specify problems, to conceptualize 
how they arose, and to plan how to remediate them. 

It is useful to view problems or stuck points in therapy as opportuni¬ 
ties for you to refine your conceptualization of the patient. In addition, 
problems in therapy often provide insight into problems the patient 
experiences outside the office. Finally, difficulties with one patient pro¬ 
vide an opportunity for you to refine your own skills, to promote your 
flexibility and creativity, and to gain new understandings and expertise 
in helping other patients, as problems can arise not just because of the 
patient’s characteristics but also because of the therapist’s relative weak¬ 
nesses. This chapter describes how to uncover the existence of prob¬ 
lems and how to conceptualize and remediate problems at stuck points 
in therapy. 


UNCOVERING THE EXISTENCE OF A PROBLEM 

You can uncover a problem in a number of ways: 


346 


Problems in Therapy 


347 


1. By listening to patients’ unsolicited feedback. 

2. By directly soliciting patients’ feedback, whether or not they have 
provided verbal or nonverbal signals of a problem. 

3. By reviewing recordings of therapy sessions alone or with a 
colleague or supervisor and rating the tape on the Cognitive 
Therapy Rating Scale (Appendix C). 

4. By tracking progress according to objective tests and the patient’s 
subjective report of symptom relief. 


A problem obviously exists when patients provide you with nega¬ 
tive feedback (e.g., “I don’t think you understand what I’m saying,” or 
“I understand what you’re saying intellectually but not in my gut”). Many 
patients, however, allude indirectly to a problem (e.g., “I see what you’re 
saying, but I don’t know if I could do it any other way,” or, “I’ll try” 
[implying that they believe they will be unsuccessful in carrying out a 
task]). In these cases, you should question the patient further to ascer¬ 
tain whether a problem does indeed exist and to determine the dimen¬ 
sions of the problem. 

Many times, however, the patient fails to relate, either directly or 
indirectly, a problem with therapy. You can discover problems if you 
adhere to the standard structure of the session (which includes ask¬ 
ing the patient for feedback at the end of the session), by periodically 
checking on the depth of the patient’s understanding during the ses¬ 
sion, and by eliciting the patient’s automatic thoughts when you notice 
an affect shift during the session. 

For example, on one occasion I sensed through Sally’s nonverbal 
cues (a faraway look in her eyes, restless shifting in her seat) that she 
was not fully processing what I was saying or that she did not agree. I 
asked her what was going through her mind. I took other steps through¬ 
out our session to make sure that Sally and I shared an understanding. 
I took care either to summarize often during the session or to ask Sally 
to summarize. I also asked her to rate how much she believed the sum¬ 
mary (e.g., “Sally, we’ve just been talking about the idea that you’re not 
completely responsible for your mother’s unhappiness even though you 
moved away from home ... How much do you believe that now?”). 

I further checked on Sally’s understanding at different points dur¬ 
ing the session (e.g., “Is it clear to you why else your roommate might 
be reacting in this way? ... Could you put it in your own words?”). I also 
made sure to elicit feedback at the end of the session (e.g., “Anything I 
said today that bothered you? ... Anything you thought I didn’t under¬ 
stand?”). Because I guessed that Sally might hesitate to give me nega- 



348 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


tive feedback, I also asked very specifically for feedback about a portion 
of the session during which I suspected she might have had a negative 
reaction: “How about when I suggested that you might be able to be 
more assertive with your mother? Did that bother you? ... Do you think 
you would be able to tell me if it had bothered you?” 

In summary, you should seek to allay or to uncover problems within 
a therapy session by checking on patients’ understanding, by asking for 
feedback, and by raising suspected problems directly during the session 
itself. You may also ask patients to complete a written evaluation of a 
session (page 77) that you can review with them at the next session. 

If you are a novice therapist, you may be unaware of the existence 
of a problem and/or be less able to specify a problem. You should solicit 
permission to record therapy sessions to review on your own or (pref¬ 
erably) with an experienced cognitive behavior therapist. Obtaining 
patients’ consent is usually not a problem if you present it in a positive 
light: “I have an unusual opportunity for you that I’m only offering a 
few patients [or that I’m only offering to you]. You should feel free to 
say yes or no. I occasionally record therapy sessions so I can listen to 
them later and figure out how I might be able to help patients more. 
[If relevant, “I may play them to a colleague [or supervisor] to get feed¬ 
back. I always find that two heads are better than one.”] I’ll delete or 
erase the recording immediately afterward, {pause) Is it okay with you if 
we start out taping the session? If it bothers you after a few minutes, we 
can always turn it off or get rid of the recording at the end.” 

Another clear indication of a problem is a lack of progress or dete¬ 
rioration in a patient’s functioning and/or mood (identified through 
self-report or objective tests such as the Beck Depression Inventory [see 
Appendix B]. You might suggest this lack of progress as an agenda item 
and collaborate with the patient in planning a more effective direction 
for treatment. 

Finally, you should continually try to put yourself in patients’ shoes, 
to see how they view their world and to reveal what obstacles might 
inhibit their ability to take a more functional perspective of their diffi¬ 
culties (e.g., “If I were Sally, howwould I feel during therapy? Whatwould 
I think when my therapist said_or_?”). 

CONCEPTUALIZING PROBLEMS 

Having identified the existence of a problem, be alert for automatic 
thoughts blaming the patient (e.g., “He’s resistant/manipulative/unmo¬ 
tivated”). These labels tend to alleviate a therapist’s sense of responsi¬ 
bility for resolving the difficulty and interfere with problem solving. 
Instead, ask yourself: 




Problems in Therapy 


349 


“What has the patient said (or not said) or done (or not done) 
in session (or between sessions) that is a problem?” 


Next, you ideally would consult with a supervisor who has reviewed 
a recording of the therapy session. You will undoubtedly need help in 
determining whether the problem is due to the patient’s pathology, 
errors you have made, treatment factors (such as the level of care, for¬ 
mat of therapy, session frequency), and/or factors external to treatment 
(e.g., an organic disease, a psychologically toxic home or work environ¬ 
ment, ineffective medication or deleterious side effects, an absence of 
needed adjunctive treatments; seej. S. Beck, 2005). 

Having identihed a problem that calls for a change in what you are 
doing, you will conceptualize the level at which the problem occurred: 


1. Is it merely a technicalprobleml For example, did you 
use an inappropriate technique or use a technique 
incorrectly? 

2. Is it a more complex problem with the session as a whole? 
For example, did you correctly identify a dysfunctional 
cognition but then fail to intervene effectively? 

3. Is there an ongoing problem across several sessions? For 
example, has there been a breakdown in collaboration? 


Typically, problems occur in one or more of the following catego¬ 
ries: 


1. Diagnosis, conceptualization, and treatment planning. 

2. Therapeutic alliance. 

3. Structure and/or pace of the session. 

4. Socialization of the patient. 

5. Dealing with automatic thoughts. 

6. Accomplishing therapeutic goals in and across sessions. 

7. Patients’ processing of the session content. 


The following questions can help you and your supervisor specify 
the nature of a therapeutic problem. Then you can formulate, priori¬ 
tize, and select one or more specihc objectives on which to focus. 






350 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


Diagnosis, Conceptuaiization, and Treatment Pianning 

DIAGNOSIS 

1. “Have I made a correct diagnosis on the five axes according to the 
latest DSM?” 

2. “Is a medication consult indicated for this patient?” 

CONCEPTUALIZATION 

1. “Do I use a Cognitive Conceptualization Diagram [page 200] to 
identify the patient’s most central dysfunctional cognitions and 
behaviors?” 

2. “Do I continually refine my conceptualization as I get new data and 
share my conceptualization with the patient at strategically appro¬ 
priate times? Does the conceptualization make sense and ‘ring true’ 
to the patient?” 


TREATMENT PLANNING 

1. “Have I based treatment on the cognitive formulation of the patient’s 
disorder(s) and my individual conceptualization of the patient? Do I 
continually modify treatment when needed, based on my conceptu¬ 
alization?” 

2. “Have I varied standard cognitive behavior therapy, when needed, 
for this patient’s Axis I (and/or Axis II) disorder(s)?” 

3. “Have I addressed the need for a major life change if it became 
apparent that improvement via therapy alone is unlikely?” 

4. “Have I incorporated skills training when needed?” 

5. “Have I included family members in treatment as appropriate?” 

Therapeutic Aiiiance 

COLLABORATION 

1. “Have the patient and I truly been collaborating} Are we functioning 
as a team? Are we both working hard? Do we both feel responsible 
for progress?” 

2. “Have we been covering the problems that are of most concern to 
the patient?” 

3. “Have I guided the patient to an appropriate level of compliance 
and control in the therapy session?” 

4. “Have we agreed on the goals for treatment?” 

5. “Have I provided the rationale for my interventions and homework 
assignments?” 


Problems in Therapy 


351 


PATIENT’S FEEDBACK 

1. “Have I regularly encouraged the patient to provide honest feed¬ 
back? ” 

2. “Have I monitored the patient’s affect during the session and elic¬ 
ited automatic thoughts when I noticed a shift?” 

PATIENT’S VIEW OF THERAPY AND THERAPIST 

1. “Does the patient have a positive view of therapy and of me?” 

2. “Does the patient believe, at least somewhat, that therapy can help?” 

3. “Does the patient see me as competent, collaborative, and caring?” 

THERAPIST’S REACTIONS 

1. “Do I care about this patient? Does my caring come across?” 

2. “Do I feel competent to help this patient? Does my sense of compe¬ 
tence come across?” 

3. “Do I have negative thoughts about this patient or about myself with 
respect to this patient? Have I evaluated and responded to these 
thoughts?” 

4. “Do I see problems in the therapeutic alliance as an opportunity for 
growth versus assigning blame?” 

5. “Do I project a realistically upbeat and optimistic view of how ther¬ 
apy can help?” 

Structuring and Pacing the Therapy Session 

AGENDA 

1. “Do we quickly set a complete and specific agenda toward the begin¬ 
ning of the session?” 

2. “Do we prioritize the agenda topics and roughly decide how to split 
our time?” 

3. “Do we collaboratively determine which topic to discuss first?” 

PACING 

1. “Do we allot and spend an appropriate amount of time for the stan¬ 
dard session elements: mood check, brief review of the week, setting 
the agenda, homework review, discussion of agenda topic (s), setting 
new homework, periodic summaries, feedback?” 

2. “Do we collaboratively decide what to do if more time is needed for a 
problem than we had allotted or if important topics arose that were 
not part of the original agenda?” 


352 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


3. “Do I appropriately and gently interrupt the patient when needed, 
or do we spend too much time on unproductive discourse?” 

4. “Do we leave enough time at the end of the session to ensure that 
the patient will remember the most important points and has under¬ 
stood and agreed with the new homework assignments? To ensure 
that the patient’s core beliefs were deactivated so the patient left the 
session feeling emotionally stable?” 

Socializing the Patient to Cognitive Behavior Therapy 

GOAL SETTING 

1. “Has the patient set reasonable, concrete goals? Does the patient 
keep these goals in mind throughout the week? Is the patient com¬ 
mitted to working toward these goals? Are these goals under the 
patient’s control? Is the patient trying to change someone else?” 

2. “Do I periodically review progress toward the patient’s goals?” 

3. “Do I help the patient hrmly keep in mind why it is worth it to work 
in therapy (i.e., to reach his goals)?” 

EXPECTATIONS 

1. “What are the patient’s expectations for himself and for me?” 

2. “Does the patient believe all problems can be solved quickly and 
easily? Or that I alone should solve his problems? Does the patient 
understand the importance of taking an active, collaborative role?” 

3. “Does the patient understand the necessity of learning certain tools 
and skills and using them regularly between sessions?” 

PROBLEM-SOLVING ORIENTATION 

1. “Does the patient specify problems to work on?” 

2. “Does the patient collaborate with me to solve problems instead of 
just air them?” 

3. “Does the patient fear solving current problems because then he will 
have to tackle other problems (such as a decision about a relation¬ 
ship or work) ? ” 


COGNITIVE MODEL 

1. “Does the patient understand that automatic thoughts influence his 
emotions and behavior (and sometimes physiology), that some of his 
thoughts are distorted, and that he can feel better and behave in a 
more adaptive way if he evaluates and responds to his thinking?” 


Problems in Therapy 


353 


HOMEWORK 

1. “Have we designed homework around the patient’s key issues?” 

2. “Does the patient understand how homework relates to the work of 
the therapy session and to his overall goals?” 

3. “Does the patient think about our therapy work throughout the week 
and does he do homework thoroughly?” 

Dealing with Automatic Thoughts 

IDENTIFYING AND SELECTING KEY AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS 

1. “Do we identify the actual words and/or images that go through the 
patient’s mind when he is distressed?” 

2. “Do we identify the range of relevant automatic thoughts?” 

3. “Do we select key thoughts to evaluate (i.e., the thoughts associated 
with the most distress or dysfunction)?” 

RESPONDING TO AUTOMATIC THOUGHTS AND BELIEFS 

1. “Do we not only identify key cognitions, hut also evaluate and 
respond to them?” 

2. “Do I avoid assuming a priori that the patient’s cognitions are dis¬ 
torted? Do I use guided discovery and avoid persuasion and chal¬ 
lenge?” 

3. “If one line of questioning is ineffective, do I try other ways?” 

4. “Having collahoratively formulated an alternative response, do I 
check to see how much the patient believed it? Does his emotional 
distress decrease?” 

5. “If needed, do we try other techniques to reduce the patient’s dis¬ 
tress? If needed, do we mark relevant cognitions for future work?” 

MAXIMIZING COGNITIVE CHANGE 

1. “Do we write down the patient’s new, more functional understand- 
mgs? 

Accomplishing Therapeutic Goals in and across Sessions 

IDENTIFYING OVERALL AND SESSION-BY-SESSION OBJECTIVES 

1. “Have I appropriately expressed to the patient that the objective of 
treatment is not only to get him better but also to teach him lifelong 
skills so he can stay better?” 


354 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


2. “Do I help the patient identify one or more important problems to 
discuss in each session?” 

3. “Do we devote time to hoth problem solving and cognitive restruc¬ 
turing? ” 

4. “Do we work on both behavioral change and cognitive change for 
homework? ” 

MAINTAINING A CONSISTENT FOCUS 

1. “Do I use guided discovery to help the patient identify relevant 
beliefs?” 

2. “Can I state which beliefs of the patient are most central and which 
are narrower or more peripheral?” 

3. “Do I consistently explore the relationship of new problems to the 
patient’s central beliefs? Are we doing consistent, sustained work 
on the patient’s central beliefs at each session instead of only crisis 
intervention?” 

4. “If we have discussed childhood events, was there a clear rationale 
for why we needed to do so? Have I helped the patient see how his 
early beliefs relate to his current problems and how such insight can 
help him in the coming week?” 


INTERVENTIONS 

1. “Do I choose interventions based on both my goals for the session 
and the patients’ agenda?” 

2. “Can I clearly state to myself both the patient’s dysfunctional belief 
and a more functional belief toward which I am guiding him?” 

3. “Do I check how distressed the patient felt and/or how strongly he 
endorsed an automatic thought or belief both before and after an 
intervention so I could judge how successful the intervention was?” 

4. “If an intervention is relatively unsuccessful, do I switch gears and 
try another approach?” 

Patients’ Processing of the Session Content 

MONITORING PATIENTS’ UNDERSTANDING 

1. “Have I summarized (or asked the patient to summarize) frequently 
during the session?” 

2. “Have I asked the patient to state his conclusions in his own 
words?” 

3. “Have I been alert for nonverbal signs of confusion or disagree¬ 
ment?” 


Problems in Therapy 


355 


CONCEPTUALIZING PROBLEMS IN UNDERSTANDING 

1. “Have I checked out my hypotheses with the patient?” 

2. “If a patient has difficulty understanding what I am trying to express, 
is it due to a mistake I have made? To my lack of concreteness? To 
my vocabulary? To the amount of material I am presenting in one 
chunk or in one session?” 

3. “Is a difficulty in understanding due to the patient’s level of emo¬ 
tional distress in the therapy session? To distraction? To automatic 
thoughts the patient is having at the moment?” 


MAXIMIZING CONSOLIDATION OF LEARNING 

1. “What have I done to ensure that the patient will remember key 
parts of the therapy session during the week and even after therapy 
has ended?” 

2. “Have I motivated the patient to read his therapy notes daily?” 


STUCK POINTS 

At times, patients may feel better during individual sessions but fail 
to make progress over the course of several sessions. The experienced 
therapist, in lieu of the preceding questions, may hrst wish to rule in or 
rule out hve key problem areas. Having determined that you have a cor¬ 
rect diagnosis, conceptualization, and treatment plan tailored for the 
patient’s disorder (and have correctly employed techniques), you assess 
the following, alone or with a consultant: 


1. Do the patient and I have a solid therapeutic alliance! 

2 . Do we both have a clear idea of the patient’s goals for therapy? Is 
he committed to working toward his goals? 

3. Does the patient truly believe the cognitive mode! —that his 
thinking influences his mood and behavior, that his thinking at 
times is dysfunctional, and that evaluating and responding to 
dysfunctional thinking positively affect how he feels emotionally 
and how he behaves? 

4. Is the patient socialized to cognitive behavior therapy—does he 
contribute to the agenda, collaboratively work toward solving 
problems, do homework, provide feedback? 

5. Is the patient’s biology (e.g., illness, medication side effects, 
or inadequate level of medication) or his external environment 





356 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


(e.g., an abusive partner, an extremely demanding job, or an 
intolerable level of poverty or crime In his environment) interfering 
with your work together? 


REMEDIATING PROBLEMS IN THERAPY 

Depending on the identified problem, you might consider the advis¬ 
ability of one or more of the following: 


1. Doing a more in-depth diagnostic evaluation. 

2. Referring the patient for a physical or neuropsychological 
examination. 

3. Refining your conceptualization of the patient and checking it out 
with him. 

4. Reading more about the treatment of the patient's Axis I (and 
Axis II) disorder(s). 

5. Seeking specific feedback from the patient about his experience 
of therapy and of you. 

6. Reestablishing the patient's goals for therapy (and possibly 
examining the advantages and disadvantages of working toward 
and accomplishing them). 

7. Identifying and responding to your own automatic thoughts about 
the patient or about your skill as a therapist. 

8. Reviewing the cognitive model with the patient and eliciting any 
doubts or misunderstandings he may have. 

9. Reviewing the treatment plan with the patient (and eliciting his 
concerns or doubts about it). 

10. Reviewing the patient's responsibilities (and eliciting his 
reactions). 

11. Emphasizing setting and reviewing homework in session and 
accomplishment of homework throughout the week. 

12. Working consistently on key automatic thoughts, beliefs, and 
behaviors across sessions. 

13. Checking on the patient's understanding of session content and 
having him record the most important points. 

14. Based on the patient's needs and preferences, changing (in one 
direction or the other) the pace or structure of the session, the 
amount or difficulty of material covered, the degree of empathy 








Problems in Therapy 


351 


you have been expressing, the degree to which you have been 
didactic or persuasive, and/or the relative focus on problem 
solving. 


You should monitor your own thoughts and mood when seeking to 
conceptualize and remediate problems in therapy because your cogni¬ 
tions may at times interfere with problem solving. It is likely that all ther¬ 
apists, at least occasionally, have negative thoughts about patients, the 
therapy, and/or themselves as therapists. Typical therapist assumptions 
that interfere with making changes to the therapy format include: 


“If I interrupt the patient, he’ll think I’m controlling him.” 

“If I structure the session with an agenda, I’ll miss something 
important.” 

“If I record a session. I’ll be too self-conscious.” 

“If my patient gets annoyed with me, she’ll drop out of therapy.” 


Finally, when you encounter a problem in treatment, you have a 
choice. You can catastrophize about the problem and/or blame yourself 
or the patient. Alternatively, you can turn the problem into an oppor¬ 
tunity to rehne your skills of conceptualization and treatment planning 
and to improve your technical expertise and your ability to vary therapy 
in accordance with the specihc needs of each patient. 






Chapter 21 

^30 


PROGRESSING AS A COGNITIVE 
BEHAVIOR THERAPIST 


T his chapter briefly outlines steps to initiate the practice of standard 
cognitive behavior therapy. You should gain experience with the 
basic techniques of cognitive behavior therapy by practicing them your¬ 
self before doing so with patients. (See Appendix B for information 
on obtaining patient worksheets, tests, and booklets.) Trying the tech¬ 
niques yourself allows you to correct difficulties in application and put¬ 
ting yourself in the patient’s role affords you the opportunity to identify 
obstacles (practical or psychological) that interfere with carrying out 
assignments. At a minimum, if you wish to become proficient in cog¬ 
nitive behavior therapy, you should do the following (if you have not 
already done so): 

1. Monitor your moods and identify your automatic thoughts when 
you experience dysphoria or anxiety, when you engage in maladaptive 
behavior, and/or avoid engaging in adaptive behavior. 

2. Write down your automatic thoughts. If you skip this step, you 
deprive yourself of the opportunity to discover potential obstacles that 
your patients may have in writing down thoughts: lack of opportu¬ 
nity, motivation, time, energy, and hope. When employing a technique 
such as assigning homework in session, you can then make a rapid com¬ 
parison between yourself and the patient. You think, “Would / have 
difficulty doing this assignment? What would I need to become moti¬ 
vated? What would get in the way of my doing it? Do I need to present 


358 


Progressing as a Cognitive Behavior Therapist 


359 


it in a more step-by-step fashion?” In other words, your progress as a 
cognitive behavior therapist is facilitated if you bring an understanding 
of yourself and human nature in general to treatment. 

3. Identify your automatic thoughts that interfere with carrying out 
the step above. Thoughts such as “I don’t have to write my automatic 
thoughts down,” or “I know this stuff. I can get by with doing this in my 
head,” are likely to impede your progress. A good adaptive response 
would acknowledge the partial truth of these thoughts but emphasize 
the advantages of behaving otherwise: “It’s true that I can probably get 
by without using cognitive behavior therapy tools on myself. But it’s also 
true that I will probably learn considerably more if I go ahead and write 
things down. I’ll better understand why my patients have difficulty if 
I myself go through the same process first to see what it feels like and 
spot potential trouble spots. What’s the big deal anyway? It’ll only take 
a couple of minutes.” 

4. Once you have become proficient at identifying your automatic 
thoughts and emotions, start doing one Thought Record a day when you 
notice your mood changing. If your thoughts are not distorted, though, 
or if you tend automatically to respond adaptively to your thoughts in 
your head, doing a TR may not lead to a change in your affect. (Remem¬ 
ber that cognitive behavior therapists do not try to eliminate negative 
emotion; they try to reduce dysfunctional degrees of emotion.) However, 
whether or not you personally benefit from doing TRs, doing them will 
sharpen your skill in teaching your patients to do them. 

5. Fill out the bottom half of the Cognitive Conceptualization 
Diagram using three typical situations in which you felt dysphoric or 
behaved in a maladaptive way. If you have difficulty specifying the situ¬ 
ation, identifying your thoughts or emotions, or uncovering the mean¬ 
ing of your thoughts, reread the relevant chapters in this book. 

6. Continue to fill in the top half of the Cognitive Conceptualiza¬ 
tion Diagram. When you feel distressed, see whether there is a theme in 
the category of helplessness, unlovability, or worthlessness underneath. 
Once you have identified a core belief, fill in the other boxes. 

7. Next, using a core belief identified in the prior exercises, fill 
out a Core Belief Worksheet (page 243). Examine your interpretation 
of situations to determine whether you are distorting evidence to sup¬ 
port a negative core belief and/or if you are ignoring or discounting 
evidence contrary to this core belief. Note: This exercise may not affect 
your belief system if you have positive, counterbalancing beliefs that 
are continuously activated, but completing the worksheet will at least 
make you more familiar with it and more likely to use it effectively with 
patients. 

8. Try other basic techniques: activity scheduling, credit lists, 
responding to spontaneous imagery, acting “as if,” writing and reading 


360 COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY; BASICS AND BEYOND 


coping cards, making functional self-comparisons, and writing down 
advantages and disadvantages when making a decision. 

9. Having used some of the fundamental conceptual and treat¬ 
ment tools yourself, choose a straightforward, uncomplicated patient 
for your hrst attempt at cognitive behavior therapy. If you select a dif- 
hcult patient, the standard treatment as described in this book may be 
inappropriate. The ideal patient for a hrst cognitive behavior therapy 
experience is one who has a simple unipolar depression or adjustment 
disorder, with no diagnosis on Axis II. It is preferable to start with a new 
patient, rather than one whom you have been treating for a time using a 
different therapeutic orientation. It is also desirable to treat this patient 
according to the guidelines presented in this book, in as pure a fashion 
as possible. A note of caution: Therapists who are experienced in a dif¬ 
ferent modality are often tempted to fall back on previously acquired 
skills that hinder cognitive behavior therapy treatment. If it is more 
practical, however, you can start using cognitive behavior therapy tech¬ 
niques with a patient already in treatment with you. Be sure to explain 
what you would like to do, provide a rationale, and elicit the patient’s 
agreement. 

10. Obtain written consent for recording therapy sessions. Review 
of therapy tapes with a colleague or supervisor is essential to prog¬ 
ress. An indispensable tool for evaluating your tapes is the Cognitive 
Therapy Scale and Manual (see Appendix C). It is used extensively by 
cognitive behavior therapy supervisors to help trainees evaluate their 
work and plan for improvement and by researchers to rate therapist 
competency. 

11. Continue throughout this process to read more about cogni¬ 
tive behavior therapy. Also be sure to read booklets, articles, or books 
that are intended for patients so you will be able to suggest appropriate 
bibliotherapy to them. 

12. Refer to Wright, fiasco, and Thase (2006) for additional guide¬ 
lines in becoming a competent cognitive behavior therapist. 

13. Watch actual cognitive behavior therapy sessions conducted by 
master clinicians (see Appendix B). 

14. Seek opportunities for training and supervision, either locally 
or through the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy (see 
Appendix B). 

15. Finally, consider joining and attending conferences of the 
Academy of Cognitive Therapy, the official “home” for cognitive behav¬ 
ior therapists; clinicians and students may join as regular members or 
apply to become certified cognitive therapists. Attend local, national, 
and international conferences put on by other associations of cognitive 
behavior therapy, as well (see Appendix B). 


Appendix A 

^30 


COGNITIVE CASE WRITE-UP 


The format for the following case write-up is used with the permission of the 
Academy of Cognitive Therapy. Instructions for such a case write-up and scor¬ 
ing information are available at www.academyofct.org. 


I. CASE HISTORY 

A. Identifying Information: Sally is an 18-year-old Caucasian female 
college student, living in a freshman dorm with one roommate. 

B. Chief Complaint: Sally sought treatment for depression and anxiety. 

C. History of Present Illness: Several months after starting her fresh¬ 
man year of college, Sally developed symptoms of depression and 
anxiety. At intake, her symptoms included the following: 

• Emotional symptoms', sadness, anxiety, guilt, loss of pleasure and 
interest, hopelessness, loneliness. 

• Cognitive symptoms: pessimism, difficulty concentrating and mak¬ 
ing decisions, mild catastrophizing, self-criticism. 

• Behavioral symptoms: social withdrawal, avoiding situations per¬ 
ceived as challenging (talking to professor, roommate, persist¬ 
ing in schoolwork). 

• Physiological symptoms: loss of energy, fatigue, lowered libido, cry¬ 
ing, restlessness, inability to relax, decreased appetite, disturbed 
sleep. 

Sally faced the usual stressors of college freshmen: especially being 
away from home for the first time and encountering academic chal¬ 
lenges. She fit in well socially but after she became symptomatic, she 
began to isolate herself somewhat. 


361 


362 


APPENDIX A 


D. Psychiatric History: Sally has no prior psychiatric history. 

E. Personal and Social History: Sally is the younger of two children in 
an intact family. Her brother is 5 years older than she and achieves 
more highly academically. Her mother was always highly critical of 
Sally. Her father was more supportive of Sally, but was away from 
home a great deal due to a demandingjob. Her parents argued a 
considerable amount, but Sally doesn’t believe that unduly affected 
her. Growing up, Sally feared harsh teachers and was anxious about 
her grades. She has long been critical of herself for not measuring 
up to her brother, although her relationship with him has been fine. 
Sally has always had several close friends and dated throughout high 
school. She has maintained a good academic record. 

F. Medical History: Sally did not have any medical problems that influ¬ 
enced her psychological functioning or the treatment process. 

G. Mental Status Check: Sally was fully oriented, with depressed mood. 

H. DSM-IV-TR Diagnoses: 

• Axis 1; Major Depressive Episode, Single Episode, Moderate 

296.22 

• Axis 11: None 

• Axis 111: None 

• Axis IV: Severity of psychosocial stressors: mild (leaving home 
for first time) 

• Axis V: GAF Current— 60. Best in Past Year—85. 


H. CASE FORMULATION 

A. Precipitants: Sally’s depressive disorder was precipitated by leav¬ 
ing home for college and experiencing some initial difficulty in her 
courses. Anxiety probably interfered with efficient studying; Sally 
then became quite self-critical and dysphoric. As she withdrew from 
activities and friends, the lack of positive input contributed to her 
low mood, as did her failure to solve academic difficulties. 

B. Cross-Sectional View of Current Cognitions and Behaviors: A typi¬ 
cal current problematic situation is that Sally has difficulty studying. 
While attempting to study, Sally has the automatic thoughts: “1 can’t 
do this; I’m such a failure; I’ll never make it here.” She also has an 
image of herself, weighed down by a heavy backpack, trudging aim¬ 
lessly, looking downtrodden. These thoughts and image lead to feel¬ 
ings of sadness. In another situation, as she’s studying for a test, she 
has the automatic thoughts: “This is too hard. What if the teaching 
assistant won’t help me? What if 1 flunk?” and she feels anxious and 
then has difficulty concentrating. She also has the automatic thought: 
“1 should be doing more.” She then feels guilty. In all of these situa¬ 
tions, she stops studying, lies on her bed, and sometimes cries. 


Cognitive Case Write-Up 


363 


C. Longitudinal View of Cognitions and Behaviors: Sally always had 
a mild tendency to see herself as incompetent. While her school 
performance was above average, she was never among the brightest 
students in her classes. Academic success was very important to her 
and she developed certain assumptions: “If I work very hard then 
maybe I’ll do okay but if I don’t, I’ll fail”; “If I hide my weaknesses. 
I’ll be okay [for tbe moment] but if I ask for help. I’ll expose my 
incompetence.” Her compensatory behavioral strategies included 
working excessively hard to live up to her potential and a tendency to 
avoid asking for help so she would not expose her weaknesses. Once 
she became depressed, sbe often used avoidance (of schoolwork, of 
confronting challenges, of social opportunities). For the most part, 
Sally’s beliefs about other people were positive and functional; she 
tended to see others as well intentioned, although she was sometimes 
cowed by authority figures. She also believed that her world was rela¬ 
tively safe, stable, and predictable. 

D. Strengths and Assets: Sally had high psychological mindedness, 
objectivity, and adaptiveness. Sbe was intelligent and before depres¬ 
sion set in, very bard working. She was motivated for therapy. She 
had the ability to form good, stable relationships with others. 

E. Working Hypothesis (Summary of Conceptualization): For much of 
her life, Sally saw herself as reasonably competent, worthwhile, and 
likeable. She was always vulnerable, however, to perceiving herself 

as incompetent, for at least three reasons: (1) her mother was highly 
critical of her growing up; (2) her supportive father was often not at 
home; and (3) she had a tendency to compare herself unfavorably to 
others. For example, Sally continually compared herself unfavorably 
to ber brother, who (because he was 5 years older) could do almost 
everything better than she could. Instead of recognizing that she 
would likely be able to meet his accomplishments when she reached 
the same age, she interpreted the vast differences between what she 
was able to accomplish at a given time with what he accomplished 
during that same time as signs of her own incompetence. She also 
compared herself to the best students in the class and found herself 
lacking. 

Sally historically was vigilant for signs of incompetence in her¬ 
self and sometimes discounted or failed to recognize signs of compe¬ 
tence. She developed certain rules to ensure that her incompetence 
would not be exposed (e.g., “I must work very hard”; “I must live up 
to my potential”; “I must always do my best”). As a result, she devel¬ 
oped the following compensatory strategies: she holds high expecta¬ 
tions for herself, works very hard, is vigilant for shortcomings, and 
avoids seeking help. Until she reached college, her life was guided 
by related assumptions: “If I achieve highly, it means I’m okay.” “If I 
hide my weaknesses, others will view me as competent.” 

Throughout high school, Sally was able to achieve highly 
enough (in her estimation), but in her freshman year of college, she 


364 


APPENDIX A 


started to struggle with her studies. She became quite anxious. Her 
core belief of incompetence became activated. She started to have 
fearful automatic thoughts about failure. Her anxiety interfered with 
effective studying and problem solving. She also began to withdraw 
from others and avoid schoolwork and other challenges. Then the 
corollary to her underlying assumptions dominated her thinking: “If 
I don’t achieve highly, it means I’m incompetent.” “If I ask for help, 
I’ll be seen as incompetent.” As she began to perform more poorly, 
she became convinced of her incompetence. Failing to be productive 
and failing to gain social support from others probably contributed 
to the onset of her depression. 


III. TREATMENT PLAN 

A. Problem List 

1. Studying and writing papers 

2. Volunteering in class and taking tests 

3. Social withdrawal 

4. Lack of assertiveness with roommate, professors 

5. Spending too much time in bed 

B. Treatment Goals 

1. Decrease self-criticism 

2. Teach basic cognitive tools, Thought Record, etc. 

3. Decrease time in bed 

4. Find healthier ways to have fun. 

5. Do problem solving around studying, papers, tests. 

6. Build assertiveness skills 

C. Plan for Treatment: The treatment plan was to reduce Sally’s 
depression and anxiety through helping her respond to her auto¬ 
matic thoughts (especially those connected with inadequacy and 
incompetence), increase her activities through activity scheduling, 
problem-solve difficulties with studying and homework, and build 
assertiveness through role-playing and modifying interfering beliefs. 


IV. COURSE OF TREATMENT 

A. Therapeutic Relationship: Sally easily engaged in treatment. She 
saw her therapist as competent and caring. 

B. Interventions/Procedures 

1. Taught patient standard cognitive tools of examining and 

responding to her automatic thoughts (which allowed the patient 


Cognitive Case Write-Up 


365 


to see her dysfunctional, distorted logic and thus significantly 
reduced depressive and anxious symptoms). 

2. Had Sally conduct behavioral experiments to test her assump¬ 
tions. This resulted in reduced avoidance and increased assertive¬ 
ness. 

3. Helped Sally schedule and increase pleasurable activities. 

4. Did straightforward problem solving. 

5. Role-played to teach assertiveness. 

C. Obstacles: None 

D. Outcome: Sally’s depression gradually reduced over a 3-month 

period after we started therapy, until she was in full remission. 


Appendix B 

^30 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR 
THERAPY RESOURCES 


TRAINING PROGRAMS 

The Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy (www.beckinstitute.org) in 
suburban Philadelphia offers a variety of onsite, off-site, distance, and online 
training programs. 


THERAPIST AND PATIENT MATERIALS AND REFERRALS 

Information about the following can be found at www.beckinstitute.org: 

Patient booklets 
Worksheet packet 

Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale and Manual 

Books, DVDs, and tapes by Aaron T. Beck, MD, and Judith S. Beck, PhD 
Educational catalog 

Referrals to mental health professionals certified by the Academy of Cognitive 
Therapy 


ASSESSMENT MATERIALS 

The following scales and manuals may be ordered from Pearson (www. 
beckscales.com): 

Beck Depression Inventory-II 

Beck Depression Inventory—Fast Screen for Medical Patients 


366 


Cognitive Behavior Therapy Resources 


367 


Beck Anxiety Inventory 
Beck Hopelessness Scale 
Beck Scale for Suicidal Ideation 
Clark-Beck Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory 
Beck Youth Inventories—Second Edition 


COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY 
PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 

Academy of Cognitive Therapy {www.academyofct.org) 

Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies {www.abct.org) 

British Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapies {www.babcp. 
com) 

European Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Therapies {www.eabct. 
com) 

International Association for Cognitive Psychotherapy {www.the-iacp.com) 


Appendix C 

^30 


COGNITIVE THERAPY RATING SCALE 


The following rating scale, used in major research studies and by the Academy 
ot Cognitive Therapy as a measure of competency, is used with permission. 

The scale and the accompanying manual can be found at www.academyofct. 
org. 

Therapist: Patient; Date of Session: 

Tape ID#: Rater: Date of Rating: 

Session# ( ) Videotape ( ) Audiotape ( ) Live Observation 

Directions: For each item, assess the therapist on a scale from 0 to 6, and 
record the rating on the line next to the item number. Descriptions are provided 
for even-numbered scale points. If you believe the therapist falls between two of 
the descriptors, select the intervening odd number (1, 3, 5). For example, it the 
therapist set a very good agenda but did not establish priorities, assign a rating 
ot a 5 rather than a 4 or 6. 

If the descriptions tor a given Item occasionally do not seem to apply to the 
session you are rating, feel free to disregard them and use the more general 
scale below: 


1 

2 3 4 

5 6 

Barely 

Mediocre Satisfactory Good 

Very Excellent 

Adequate 


Good 


Please do not leave any Item blank. For all items, focus on the skill ot the 
therapist, taking into account how difficult the patient seems to be. 


Reprinted by permission in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, Second Edition, by 
Judith S. Beck (Guilford Press, 2011). Permission to photocopy this material is granted to 
purchasers of this book for personal use only (see copyright page for details). Purchasers 
may download a larger version of this material from xuiuiu.guilford.eom/p/beck4. 


368 










Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale 


369 


PART I. GENERAL THERAPEUTIC SKILLS 

1. AGENDA 

0 Therapist did not set agenda. 

2 Therapist set agenda that was vague or incomplete. 

4 Therapist worked with patient to set a mutually satisfactory 
agenda that included specific target problems (e.g., anxiety at 
work, dissatisfaction with marriage). 

6 Therapist worked with patient to set an appropriate agenda with 
target problems, suitable for the available time. Established 
priorities and then followed agenda. 

2. FEEDBACK 

0 Therapist did not ask for feedback to determine patient’s 
understanding of, or response to, the session. 

2 Therapist elicited some feedback from the patient, but did not 
ask enough questions to be sure the patient understood the 
therapist’s line of reasoning during the session o/'to ascertain 
whether the patient was satisfied with the session. 

4 Therapist asked enough questions to be sure that the patient 
understood the therapist’s line of reasoning throughout the 
session and to determine the patient’s reactions to the session. 
The therapist adjusted his/her behavior in response to the 
feedback when appropriate. 

6 Therapist was especially adept at eliciting and responding 
to verbal and nonverbal feedback throughout the session 
(e.g., elicited reactions to session, regularly checked for 
understanding, helped summarize main points at end of 
session). 

3. UNDERSTANDING 

0 Therapist repeatedly failed to understand what the patient 
explicitly said and thus consistently missed the point. Poor 
empathic skills. 

2 Therapist was usually able to reflect or rephrase what the 
patient explicitly said, but repeatedly failed to respond to more 
subtle communication. Limited ability to listen and empathize. 

4 Therapist generally seemed to grasp the patient’s “internal 
reality” as reflected by both what the patient explicitly said and 
what the patient communicated in more subtle ways. Good 
ability to listen and empathize. 

6 Therapist seemed to understand the patient's “internal reality” 





370 


APPENDIX C 


thoroughly and was adept at communicating this understanding 
through appropriate verbal and nonverbal responses to the 
patient (e.g., the tone of the therapist’s response conveyed 
a sympathetic understanding of the patient’s “message”). 
Excellent listening and empathic skills. 

4. INTERPERSONAL EFFECTIVENESS 

0 Therapist had poor interpersonal skills. Seemed hostile, 
demeaning, or in some other way destructive to the patient. 

2 Therapist did not seem destructive, but had significant 
interpersonal problems. At times, therapist appeared 
unnecessarily impatient, aloof, insincere or had difficulty 
conveying confidence and competence. 

4 Therapist displayed a satisfactory degree of warmth, concern, 
confidence, genuineness, and professionalism. No significant 
interpersonal problems. 

6 Therapist displayed optimal levels of warmth, concern, 

confidence, genuineness, and professionalism, appropriate for 
this particular patient in this session. 

5. COLLABORATION 

0 Therapist did not attempt to collaborate with patient. 

2 Therapist attempted to collaborate with patient, but had 

difficulty either defining a problem that the patient considered 
important or establishing rapport. 

4 Therapist was able to collaborate with patient, focus on a 
problem that both patient and therapist considered important, 
and establish rapport. 

6 Collaboration seemed excellent; therapist encouraged patient 
as much as possible to take an active role during the session 
(e.g., by offering choices) so they could function as a “team.” 

6. PACING AND EFFICIENT USE OFTIME 

0 Therapist made no attempt to structure therapy time. Session 
seemed aimless. 

2 Session had some direction, but the therapist had significant 
problems with structuring or pacing (e.g., too little structure, 
inflexible about structure, too slowly paced, too rapidly paced). 

4 Therapist was reasonably successful at using time efficiently. 
Therapist maintained appropriate control over flow of 
discussion and pacing. 

6 Therapist used time efficiently by tactfully limiting peripheral 





Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale 


371 


and unproductive discussion and by pacing the session as 
rapidly as was appropriate for the patient. 


PART II. CONCEPTUALIZATION, STRATEGY, 

AND TECHNIQUE 

7. GUIDED DISCOVERY 

0 Therapist relied primarily on debate, persuasion, or “lecturing.” 
Therapist seemed to be “cross-examining” patient, putting the 
patient on the defensive, or forcing his/her point of view on the 
patient. 

2 Therapist relied too heavily on persuasion and debate, 

rather than guided discovery. However, therapist's style was 
supportive enough that patient did not seem to feel attacked or 
defensive. 

4 Therapist, for the most part, helped patient see new 
perspectives through guided discovery (e.g., examining 
evidence, considering alternatives, weighing advantages and 
disadvantages) rather than through debate. Used questioning 
appropriately. 

6 Therapist was especially adept at using guided discovery during 
the session to explore problems and help patient draw his/ 
her own conclusions. Achieved an excellent balance between 
skillful questioning and other modes of intervention. 

8. FOCUSING ON KEY COGNITIONS OR BEHAVIORS 

0 Therapist did not attempt to elicit specific thoughts, 
assumptions, images, meanings, or behaviors. 

2 Therapist used appropriate techniques to elicit cognitions or 
behaviors; however, therapist had difficulty finding a focus or 
focused on cognitions/behaviors that were irrelevant to the 
patient’s key problems. 

4 Therapist focused on specific cognitions or behaviors relevant 
to the target problem. However, therapist could have focused 
on more central cognitions or behaviors that offered greater 
promise for progress. 

6 Therapist very skillfully focused on key thoughts, assumptions, 
behaviors, etc., that were most relevant to the problem area and 
offered considerable promise for progress. 

9. STRATEGY FOR CHANGE {Note: For this item, focus 

on the quality of the therapist’s strategy for change, not 





372 


APPENDIX C 


on how effectively the strategy was implemented or 
whether change actually occurred.) 

0 Therapist did not select cognitive-behavioral techniques. 

2 Therapist selected cognitive-behavioral techniques; however, 
either the overall strategy for bringing about change seemed 
vague or did not seem promising in helping the patient. 

4 Therapist seemed to have a generally coherent strategy for 
change that showed reasonable promise and incorporated 
cognitive-behavioral techniques. 

6 Therapist followed a consistent strategy tor change that 

seemed very promising and incorporated the most appropriate 
cognitive-behavioral techniques. 

,10. APPLICATION OF COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL 
TECHNIOUES {Note\ For this item, focus on how 
skillfully the techniques were applied, not on how 
appropriate they were for the target problem or whether 
change actually occurred.) 

0 Therapist did not apply any cognitive-behavioral techniques. 

2 Therapist used cognitive-behavioral techniques, but there were 
significant flaws in the way they were applied. 

4 Therapist applied cognitive-behavioral techniques with 
moderate skit!. 

6 Therapist very skillfuiiy and resourcefully employed cognitive- 
behavioral techniques. 

11. HOMEWORK 

0 Therapist did not attempt to incorporate homework relevant to 
cognitive therapy. 

2 Therapist had significant difficulties incorporating homework 
(e.g., did not review previous homework, did not explain 
homework in sufficient detail, assigned inappropriate 
homework). 

4 Therapist reviewed previous homework and assigned 
“standard” cognitive therapy homework generally relevant 
to issues dealt with in session. Homework was explained in 
sufficient detail. 

6 Therapist reviewed previous homework and carefully assigned 
homework drawn from cognitive therapy for the coming 
week. Assignment seemed “custom-tailored” to help patient 
incorporate new perspectives, test hypotheses, experiment with 
new behaviors discussed during session, etc. 




Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale 


373 


PART III. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 

12. _a. Did any special problems arise during the session (e.g., 

nonadherence to homework, interpersonal issues between 
therapist and patient, hopelessness about continuing therapy, 
relapse)? 

YES NO 

_b. If yes'. 

0 Therapist could not deal adequately with special problems that 
arose. 

2 Therapist dealt with special problems adequately, but used 
strategies or conceptualizations inconsistent with cognitive 
therapy. 

4 Therapist attempted to deal with special problems using a 
cognitive framework and was moderately skillful in applying 
techniques. 

6 Therapist was very skillful at handling special problems using 
cognitive therapy framework. 

13. Were there any significant unusual factors in this session that you feel 
justified the therapist’s departure from the standard approach measured 
by this scale? 

YES (Please explain below) NO 


PART IV. OVERALL RATINGS AND COMMENTS 

14. How would you rate the clinician overall in this session, as a cognitive 
therapist? 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 

Poor Barely Mediocre Satisfactory Good Very Excellent 

Adequate Good 




374 


APPENDIX C 


15. If you were conducting an outcome study in cognitive therapy, do you think 
you would select this therapist to participate at this time (assuming this 
session is typical)? 


0 

1 

2 3 

4 

Definitely Not 

Probably 

Not 

Uncertain- Probably 

Borderline Yes 

Definitely Yes 

1 . How difficult did you feel this 

patient was to work with? 


0 1 

2 

3 4 5 

6 

Not Difficult- 
Very Receptive 


Moderately 

Difficult 

Extremely 

Difficult 


17. COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THERAPIST’S 
IMPROVEMENT: 


18. OVERALL RATING: 


0 1 2 3 4 5 

Rating Scale:- 

Inadequate Mediocre Satisfactory Good Very Good Excellent 


Using the scale above, please give an overall rating of this therapist's skills as 
demonstrated on this tape. Please circle the appropriate number. 



REFERENCES 


Alford, B. A., & Beck, A. T. (1997). The integrative power of cognitive therapy. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author. 

Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (Eds.). (2010). Handbook of assessment and treatment 
planning for psychological disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Arnkoff, D. B., & Glass, C. R. (1992). Cognitive therapy and psychotherapy integra¬ 
tion. In D. K. Freedheim (Ed.), History of psychotherapy: A century of change (pp. 
657-694). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and 
panic (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Beck, A. T. (1964). Thinking and depression: 11. Theory and therapy. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 10, 561-571. 

Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Causes and treatment. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. 

Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: Interna¬ 
tional Universities Press. 

Beck, A. T. (1987). Cognitive approaches to panic disorder: Theory and therapy. 
In S. Rachman &J. Maser (Eds.), Panic: Psychological perspectives (pp. 91-109). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Beck, A. T. (1999). Cognitive aspects of personality disorders and their relation 
to syndromal disorders: A psychoevolutionary approach. In C. R. Cloninger 
(Ed.), Personality and psychopathology (pp. 411-429). Washington, DC: Ameri¬ 
can Psychiatric Press. 

Beck, A. T. (2005). The current state of cognitive therapy: A 40-year retrospective. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 953-959. 

Beck, A. T., & Beck, J. S. (1991). The personality belief questionnaire. Bala Cynwyd, PA: 
Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. 


375 


376 


References 


Beck, A. T., & Emery, G. (with Greenberg, R. L.). (1985). Anxiety disorders and pho¬ 
bias: A cognitive perspective. New York: Basic Books. 

Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., Davis, D. D., & Associates. (2004). Cognitive therapy of 
personality disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depres¬ 
sion. New York: Guilford Press. 

Beck, A. T., Wright, F. D., Newman, C. F., & Liese, B. S. (1993). Cognitive therapy of 
substance abuse. New York: Guilford Press. 

Beck, J. S. (2001). A cognitive therapy approach to medication compliance. InJ. 
Kay (Ed.), Integrated treatment of psychiatric disorders (pp. 113-141). Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Publishing. 

Beck, J. S. (2005). Cognitive therapy for challenging problems: What to do when the basics 
don’t work. New York: Guilford Press. 

Beck, J. S. (2011). Cognitive behavior therapy luorksheetpacket (3rd ed.). Bala Cynwyd, 
PA: Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy. 

Bennett-Levy,J., Butler, G., Fennell, M., Hackman, A., Mueller, M., & Westbrook, D. 
(Eds.). (2004). Oxford guide to behavioral experiments in cognitive therapy. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University. 

Benson, H. (1975). The relaxation response. New York: Avon. 

Burns, D. D. (1980). Feeling good: The new mood therapy. New York: Signet. 

Butler, A. C., Chapman, J. E. Forman, E. M., & Beck, A. T. (2006). The empirical 
status of cognitive-behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Clinical Psy¬ 
chology Review, 26, 17-31. 

Chambless, D., & Ollendick, T. H. (2001). Empirically supported psychological 
interventions. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 685-716. 

Chiesa A., & Serretti, A. (2010a). Mindfulness based cognitive therapy for psychiat¬ 
ric disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Research. 

Chiesa A., & Serretti, A. (2010b). A systematic review of neurobiological and clini¬ 
cal features of mindfulness mediation. Psychological Medicine, 40, 1239-1252. 

Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (2010). Cognitive therapy of anxiety disorders: Science and 
practice. New York: Guilford Press. 

Clark, D. A., Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. A. (1999). Scientific foundations of cognitive 
theory and therap-^ of depression. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Clark, D. M. (1989). Anxiety states: Panic and generalized anxiety. In K. Hawton, 
P. M. Salkovskis, J. Kirk, & D. M. Clark (Eds.), Cognitive-behavior therapy for 
psychiatric problems: A practical guide (pp. 52-96). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

D’Zurilla, T. J., & Nezu, A. M. (2006). Problem-solving therapy: A positive approach to 
clinical intervention (3rd ed.). New York: Springer. 

Davis, M., Eshelman, E. R., & McKay, M. (2008). The relaxation and stress reduction 
workbook (6th ed.). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. 

DeRubeis, R. J., & Eeeley, M. (1990). Determinants of change in cognitive therapy 
for depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 469-482. 

Dobson, D., & Dobson, K. S. (2009). Evidence-based practice of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy. New York: Guilford Press. 

Dobson, K. S., & Dozois D. J. A. (2009). Historical and philosophical bases of the 
cognitive-behavioral therapies. In K. S. Dobson (Ed.), Handbook of cognitive- 
behavioral therapies (3rd ed., pp. 3-37). New York: Guilford Press. 


References 


377 


Edwards, D. J. A. (1989). Cognitive restructuring through guided imagery: Les¬ 
sons from Gestalt therapy. In A. Freeman, K. M. Simon, L. E. Beutler, & H. 
Arkowitz (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of cognitive therapy (pp. 283-297). New 
York: Plenum Press. 

Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Lyle Stuart. 

Evans, J. M. G., Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Piasecki, J. M., Grove, W. M., Garvey, 
M. J., et al. (1992). Differential relapse following cognitive therapy and phar¬ 
macology for depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 802-808. 

Feeley, M., DeRubeis, R. J., & Gelfand, L. A. (1999). The temporal relation of 
adherence and alliance to symptom change in cognitive therapy for depres¬ 
sion./oMrraaZ of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 578-582. 

Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998). Treating the trauma of rape: Cognitive-behavioral 
therapy forPTSD. New York: Guilford Press. 

Frisch, M. B. (2005). Quality of life therapy. New York: Wiley. 

Garner, D. M., & Bemis, K. M. (1985). Cognitive therapy for anorexia nervosa. In 
D. M. Garner & P. E. Garfinkel (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy for anorexia 
nervosa and bulimia (pp. 107-146). New York: Guilford Press. 

Goldapple, K., Segal, Z., Garson, C., Lau, M., Bieling, R, Kennedy, S., etal. (2004). 
Modulation of cortical-limbic pathways in major depression. Archives of Gen¬ 
eral Psychiatry, 61, 34-41. 

Goldstein, A., & Stainback, B. (1987). Overcoming agoraphobia: Conquering fear of the 
outside world. New York: Viking Penguin. 

Greenberg L. S. (2002). Emotion focused therapy: Coaching clients to work through their 
feelings. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Hayes, S. C., Follette, V. M., & Linehan, M. M. (Eds.). (2004). Mindfulness and accep¬ 
tance: Expanding the cognitive-behavioral tradition. New York: Guilford Press. 

Holland, S. (2003). Avoidance of emotion as an obstacle to progress. In R. L. 
Leahy (Ed.), Roadblocks in cognitive-behavioral therapy: Transforming challenges 
into opportunities for change (pp. 116-131). New York: Guilford Press. 

Hollon, S. D., & Beck, A. T. (1993). Cognitive and cognitive-behavioral therapies. 
In A. E. Bergin & S.L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior 
change: An empirical analysis (4th ed., pp. 428-466). New York: Wiley. 

Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1992). Cognitive therapy and 
the prevention of depression. Applied and Preventive Psychiatry, 1, 89-95. 

Jacobson, E. (1974). Progressive relaxation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
Midway Reprint. 

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Pull catastrophe living. New York: Delta. 

Kazantzis, N., Deane, F. R, Ronan, K. R., & Lampropoulos, G. K. (2005). Empirical 
foundations. In N. Kazantzis, F. P. Deane, K. R. Ronan, & L. L’Abate (Eds.), 
Using homework assignments in cognitive behavior therapy (pp. 35-60). New York: 
Routledge. 

Kazantzis, N., Whittington, C., & Dattilio, F. (2010). Meta-analysis of homework 
effects in cognitive and behavioral therapy: A replication and extension. Clin¬ 
ical Psychology: Science and Practice, 17, 144-156. 

Khanna, M. S., & Kendall, P. G. (2010). Computer-assisted cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for child anxiety: Result of a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Con¬ 
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, TAl—lM). 

Kuyken, W., Padesky, C. A., & Dudley, R. (2009). Collaborative case conceptualization: 


378 


References 


Working effectively with clients in cognitive behavioral therapy. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Layden, M. A., Newman, C. F., Freeman, A., & Morse, S. B. (1993). Cognitive therapy 
of borderline personality disorder. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1991). Multimodal life history inventory. Champaign, 
IL: Research Press. 

Leahy, R. L. (2003). Emotional schemas and resistance. In R. L. Leahy (Ed.), Road¬ 
blocks in cognitive-behavioral therapy: Transforming challenges into opportunities for 
change (pp.91-115). New York: Guilford Press. 

Leahy, R. L. (2010). Beat the blues before they beat you: How to overcome depression. Carls¬ 
bad, CA: Hay House. 

Ledley, D. R., Marx, B. R, & Heimberg R. G. (2005). Making cognitive-behavioral 
therapy work: Clinical process for new practitioners. New York: Guilford Press. 

Lewinsohn, P. M., Sullivan, J. M., & Grosscup, S. J. (1980). Changing reinforc¬ 
ing events: An approach to the treatment of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research, Practice, and Training, 322-334. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Ludgate, J. W. (2009). Cognitive-behavioral therapy and relapse prevention for depression 
and anxiety. Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource. 

MacPhillamy, D. J., & Lewinsohn, P. M. (1982). The pleasant events schedule: Stud¬ 
ies on reliability, validity, and scale intercorrelation. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 50, 363-380. 

Martell, C., Addis, M., & Jacobson, N. (2001). Depression in context: Strategies for 
guided action. New York: Norton. 

McCown, D., Reibel, D., & Micozzi, M. S. (2010). Teaching mindfulness: A practical 
guide for clinicians and educators. New York: Springer. 

McCullough, J. P.,Jr. (1999). Treatment for chronic depression: Cognitive behavioral anal¬ 
ysis system of psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. 

McKay, M., Davis, M., & Fanning, P. (2009). Messages: The communication skills book 
(2nd ed.). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. 

McKay, M., & Fanning, P. (1991). Prisoners of belief. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. 

McMullin, R. E. (1986). Handbook of cognitive therapy techniques. New York: Norton. 

Meichenbaum, D. (1977). Cognitive-behavior modification: An integrative approach. 
New York: Plenum Press. 

Needleman, L. D. (1999). Cognitive case conceptualization: A guidebook for practitio¬ 
ners. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Niemeyer, R. A., & Feixas, G. (1990). The role of homework and skill acquisition 
in the outcome of group cognitive therapy for depression. Behavior Therapy, 
21(3), 281-292. 

Persons, J. B. (2008). The case formulation approach to cognitive-behavior therapy. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Persons, J. B., Burns, D. D., & Perloff, J. M. (1988). Predictors of dropout and out¬ 
come in cognitive therapy for depression in a private practice setting. Cogni¬ 
tive Therapy and Research, 12, 557-575. 

Raue, P. J., & Goldfried, M. R. (1994). The therapeutic alliance in cognitive-behav¬ 
ioral therapy. In A. O. Horvath & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), The working alliance: 
Theory, research, andpractice (pp. 131-152). New York: Wiley. 


References 


379 


Resick, R A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive processing therapy for rape victims: A 
treatment manual. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Riso, L. R, du Toil, R L., Stein, D. J., & Young, J. E. (2007). Cognitive schemas and 
core beliefs in psychological problems. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 

Rosen, H. (1988). The constructivist-development paradigm. In R. A. Dorfman 
(Ed.), Paradigms of clinical social work (pp. 317-355). New York: Brunner/ 
Mazel. 

Rush, A. J., Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., & Hollon, S. D. (1977). Comparative efficacy of 
cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy in the treatment of depressed outpa¬ 
tients. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 7(1), 17-37. 

Safran, J. D., Vallis, T. M., Segal, Z. V., & Shaw, B. E. (1986). Assessment of core 
cognitive processes in cognitive therapy. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 10, 
509-526. 

Salkovskis, P. M. (1996). The cognitive approach to anxiety: Threat beliefs, safety¬ 
seeking behavior, and the special case of health anxiety obsessions. In P. M. 
Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy: The state of the art and beyond (pp. 
48-74). New York: Guilford Press. 

Shadish, W. R., Matt, G. E., Navarro, A. M., & Phillips, G. (2000). The effects of 
psychological therapies under clinically representative conditions: A meta¬ 
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 512-529. 

Simons, A. D., Padesky, G. A., Montemarano, J., Lewis, C. C., Murakami, J., Lamb, 
K., et al. (2010). Training and dissemination of cognitive behavior therapy 
for depression in adults: A preliminary examination of therapist compe¬ 
tence and client outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, 
751-756. 

Smucker, M. R., & Dancu, C. V. (1999). Cognitive behavioral treatment for adult sur¬ 
vivors of childhood trauma: Imagery rescripting and reprocessing. Northvale, NJ: 
Aronson. 

Stirman, S. W., Buchhofer, R., McLaulin, B., Evans, A. C., & Beck, A. T. (2009). 
Public-academic partnerships: The Beck initiative: A partnership to imple¬ 
ment cognitive therapy in a community behavioral health system. Psychiatric 
Services, 60, 1302-1304. 

Tarrier, N. (Ed.). (2006). Case formulation in cognitive behaviour therapy: The treatment 
of challenging and complex cases. New York: Routledge. 

Tompkins, M. A. (2004). Using homework in psychotherapy: Strategies, guidelines, and 
forms. New York: Guilford Press. 

Weissman, A. N., & Beck, A. T. (1978). Development and validation of the Dysfunctional 
Attitude Scale: A preliminary investigation. Paper presented at the annual meet¬ 
ing of the American Educational Research Association, Toronto, Canada. 

Wenzel, A. Brown, G. K., & Beck, A. T. (2008). Cognitive therapy for suicidal patients: 
Scientific and clinical applications. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 

Williams, J. M. G., Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2007). The mind¬ 
ful way through depression: Freeing yourself from chronic unhappiness. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Wright,J. H., Basco, M. R., Thase, M. E. (2006). Learning cognitive-behavior therapy: 
An illustrative guide. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 


380 


References 


Wright, J. H., Wright, A. S., Salmon, R, Beck, A. T., Kuykendall, J., & Goldsmith, J. 
(2002). Development and initial testing on a multimedia program for com¬ 
puter-assisted cognitive therapy. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 56, 76-86. 

Young, J. E. (1999). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders: A schema-focused approach 
(3rd ed.). Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource. 

Young, J. E., & Klosko, J. (1994). Reinventing your life: How to break free of negative life 
patterns. New York: Dutton Press. 

Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema therapy: A practitioner’s 
guide. New York: Guilford Press. 


INDEX 


Page numbers followed by /indicate figure and t indicate table 


Academy of Cofirnitive Therapy, 11, 
360, 367 
Acceptance, 184 

Acceptance and commitment therapy, 

2 

Accomplishment scale, 96 
Actiyity charts, 87-88/ 97-99, 263 
to assess accuracy of predictions, 
97-98 

case example, 86, 90-93, 97-99 
to measure moods and behaviors, 
267 

Adjustment disorder, 360 
Affect. See Emotional functioning 
All-or-nothing thinking, 181/ 
Anorexia, 11 

Anxiety disorders, 5, 6, 10, 53, 263, 
265-267 

Assertiveness, 267-268 
Assessment 

case write-up, 361-364 
identifying core and intermediate 
beliefs, 205-209, 233-234 
individual conceptualization of 
patient and patient’s problems, 7, 
11, 38-39 

of intensity of emotions, 164-166 


medication adherence and effects, 
105 

mood check, 62-63 
ongoing nature of, 46-47 
of patient commitment to treatment, 
52 

patient resistance to forms, 127-128 
principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 7 

symptoms checklist, 62, 63 
therapist resources for, 366-367 
therapist skills for, 13 
types of core beliefs, 231-232 
See also Cognitive conceptualization; 
Evaluation session 
Association for Behavioral and 
Cognitive Therapies, 367 
Assumptions, 35 

changing rules and attitudes into 
form of, 211 

in cognitive conceptualization 
diagram, 201-203 
See also Intermediate beliefs 
Attentional bias, 272 
Attitudes, 35. See also Intermediate 
beliefs 

Audio-recorded therapy notes, 191 


381 


382 


Index 


Audio recording of therapy session, 
348, 360 

Automatic thoughts 

additional thoughts as reaction to 
stimulus, 147-148, 154/ 155 
alternative explanation for, 173 
alternative strateeies for evaluatine, 
178-180 

alternative strategies for responding 
to, 197 

assessing outcomes of evaluation 
process, 176 

associated emotions, 138-139 
between-session responses to, 187, 
192-197 

case example, 43, 138, 140-153, 
155-157, 160-166, 168-169, 
171-176, 178-179, 183, 185-186, 
188, 192-194 

causes of suboptimal responding, 197 
characteristics of, 137-140 
clinical significance, 137 
in cognitive conceptualization 
diagram, 199, 201 
in cognitive model, 3, 5, 30-31 
common distortions in, 179-180, 
181-182/ 

core beliefs and, 34-35, 177 
decatastrophizing, 173-174 
eliciting, 83-84, 142-147, 156/ 
embedded in therapeutic discourse, 

151- 152 

emotions versus, 159-162 
evaluating therapy effectiveness, 353 
evidence for validity of, 172-173 
formation of, 31 
full and precise expression of, 

152- 153 

getting distance from, 175 
goals of cognitive behavior therapy, 
10 

guided discovery to explore, 23-25 
hierarchy of, 201, 203/ 
homework assignments, 296 
homework review, 109-110 
identification of, 36 
identification of important thoughts, 
167-169 


identifying height of distress caused 
by incident, 148 

identifying hot cognitions, 142-143 
identifyine problematic situations, 
148-150 

identifying underlying beliefs, 
207-209 

as images. See Imaginal automatic 
thoughts 

intermediate beliefs and, 35 
interpretations versus, 150-151 
leading to depression, 43-44 
linkage to behavior, 36-40 
as obstacle to activity, 80-81 
as obstacle to feeling pleasure or 
achievement, 81 
patient’s recognition and 
understanding of, 140-142, 
155-157, 184-186 

psychological distress and, 137-138 
questions for evaluation of, 168, 
170-176, 172/ 184 
reasons for delaying therapeutic 
focus on, 169-170 
reasons for not challenging, 170 
recording responses to, 187 
refocusing attention from, 260-263 
responding to patient’s 

dysfunctional cognitions, 22-23 
reviewing therapy notes, 188-191 
role play to elicit, 145-146 
source of, 32-35, 153-155 
therapist cognitions interfering with 
therapy structure, 123-124 
therapist self-assessment, 14-15, 
358-359 

therapist self-disclosure, 180 
therapist’s evaluation of, 32, 139-140 
true, 182-184 

unarticulated beliefs behind, 

177-178 

unsuccessful attempts to restructure, 
176-178 
utility of, 139 
validity of, 139 

visualization to elicit, 144-145 
Avoidance behavior, 265-266 
AWARE technique, 197, 263 


Index 


383 


Axis I disorders, 201-203, 230, 239, 
248, 251 

Axis 11 disorders, 11, 18, 360 

B 

Beck Depression Inventory, 62, 63 
Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior 
Therapy, 360, 366 
Behavior 

linkage of automatic thoughts to, 
36-40 

linkage of beliefs to, 226 
Behavioral activation, 2 

activity review, 81-83, 85-86 
automatic thoughts as obstacles to, 
80-81, 83-84 
case example, 82-97 
educating patient about benehts of, 
89-90 

homework assignment, 296 
identifying pleasurable activities, 
94-99 

lack of mastery or pleasure in, 81 
patient’s recognition of benefits of, 
104-105 

therapeutic significance, 99 
therapeutic strategies for, 81-82 
Behavioral experiments, 10 
case example, 84-85 
homework assignments, 297 
preparing for negative outcomes, 
307-308 
purpose, 26 
to test beliefs, 217-218 
Belief modification, 35-36 
”as if” technique, 226 
case example, 215-226 
cognitive continuum technique for, 
218-220 

considering other people’s beliefs 
for, 222-225 

Core Belief Worksheet for, 242-246 
course of, for core beliefs, 230-231 
developing and strengthening new 
core beliefs, 239-241 
early intervention, 230 


historical testing of core belief for, 

247- 248 

identifying important beliefs for, 
209-210, 227 
obstacles to, 230 

questioning technique for, 215-217 
resistance of core beliefs to, 230 
restructuring early memories for, 

248- 255 

role play for, 220-222 
strategies for, 214, 227, 241-242, 
242/ 255 

therapist self-disclosure for, 227 
use of extreme contrasts for, 
246-247 

using fictional characters and 
metaphors for, 247 

Beliefs. See Core beliefs; Intermediate 
beliefs 

Better/worse list, 104-105, 104/ 
Bibliotherapy, 239, 297 
Booster sessions, 316, 327-331 
Brief therapy, 3 

C 

Case write-up, 361-365 
Catastrophic thinking, 173-174, 181/ 
Change 

attributing progress to patient, 
318-319 

cognitive model of, 2, 3 
goals of cognitive behavior therapy, 
10, 316 

as modification of dysfunctional 
beliefs, 35-36 

patient commitment to, 125 
step model for monitoring progress 
toward goals, 164-165, 165/ 

See also Belief modification 
Cognitive behavioral analysis, 2 
Cognitive behavior therapy 
applications, 3, 4t 
basic principles, 6-11 
conceptual basis, 2, 3. See also 
Cognitive model 
goals, 8, 158-159, 316 


384 


Index 


Cognitive behavior therapy (cont.) 
origins and conceptual 
development, 1, 2-3, 5-6 
outcomes research, 4-5 
patient selection for first application 
of, 360 

resources for therapists, 366-367 
Cognitive conceptualization 
case example, 37/ 40-44, 57-58, 
201-204 

childhood data in, 201 
coping strategies in, 203-204 
development of, 29-30, 38-40, 
44-45, 57 

diagram, 199, 200/ 201-205, 202/ 

359 

evolving formulation of, 30, 40, 45, 
121, 204 

presenting to patient, 204-205 
purpose, 29, 39-40, 45, 198, 199 
as source of problems in therapy, 

350 

Cognitive continuum, 218-220 
Cognitive distortions, 179-180, 
181-182/ 

Cognitive model 

automatic thoughts and behavior 
in, 36 

complex sequences in, 38-40 
conceptual basis, 3, 30-31 
educating patient about, 70-73, 
140-142 

monitoring patient’s understanding 
of, 352, 355 

Cognitive processing therapy, 2 
Cognitive therapy. See Cognitive 
behavior therapy 
Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale, 
368-374 

Cognitive Therapy Scale and Manual, 

360 

Collaborative empiricism, 10 
Compensatory strategies, 363 
Computer-assisted cognitive behavior 
therapy, 4 

Consultation with supervisor, 349 
Contrasting technique, 245 


Coping card, 15-16, 25 
Coping strategies, 204/ 
case example, 42-43 
in cognitive conceptualization 
diagram, 203-204 
development of, 42-43 
exposure, 265-267 
for imaginal automatic thoughts, 
284-285, 289-290 
overuse of, 204 
Core beliefs 
activation of, 32 

automatic thoughts and, 34, 177 
case example, 40-42, 229, 234, 
235-240, 242-253 

categories of negative, 228, 231-232, 
233/ 

in cognitive conceptualization 
diagram, 199, 201 
definition, 32, 198 
developing and strengthening new, 
239-241 

formation of, 35, 40-41, 201, 228, 
229,247-248 
hierarchy of, 201, 203/ 
identifying, 205-209, 233-234 
information processing in 
maintenance of, 32-33, 41 
intermediate beliefs and, 35 
negative beliefs about others, 229 
patient understanding of, 

235-239 

resistance to modification, 230 
therapeutic focus on, 35-36, 120 
therapeutic goals, 35 
therapist self-assessment, 359 
See also Belief modification 
Core Belief Worksheet, 223, 242-246, 
243/ 359 

Credit lists, 274-276 


D 

Daily Record of Dysfunctional 
Thoughts, 192-193 
Decision-making skills, 258-260 


Index 


385 


Depression, 360 

activity scheduling for, 80, 99 
behavioral activation techniques for, 
82-97 

effects of inactivity in, 80-81 
etiology, 43-44 

hrst session discussion of diagnosis 
of, 65-68 

homework assignments, 297-299 
information resources for patients 
with, 68 

origins of cognitive therapy in 
research on, 1, 5-6 
positive focus in therapy for, 26-27 
therapeutic relationship as 
treatment factor for, 18-19 

Developmental issues in therapy 
assessment, 7 

formation of core beliefs, 32-34, 35, 
201, 228 

formation of intermediate beliefs, 

35 

present focus of therapy and, 8-9 
reconstructing early memories to 
modify core beliefs, 248-255 

Diagnosis, first session discussion of, 
65-68 

Dialectical behavior therapy, 2 

Dichotomous thinking, 220 

Disqualifying positive perceptions, 
181/ 

Distancing, 290-293 

Distraction from automatic thoughts, 
261-263 

Downward arrow technique, 206-208, 
234 

Dreams, 5 

Dysfunctional Attitude Scale, 209 

E 

Education of patient 

about automatic thoughts, 140-142, 
155-157, 184-186 
about beliefs, 210-212 
about cognitive model, 70-73 


about core beliefs, 235-239 
about evaluation session objectives 
and procedures, 47, 48-49 
about hrst session structure and 
goals, 59 

about homework, 294-295, 301 
about imaginal automatic thoughts, 
277-280 

about session structure, 101 
on benehts of activity, 89-90 
expectations for treatment, 56 
hrst session discussion of diagnosis, 
65-68 

introduction of cognitive behavior 
therapy approach, 13-14 
monitoring patient’s processing of 
session content, 354-355 
presentation of cognitive 
conceptualization, 204-205 
principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 9 

for responding to automatic 
thoughts, 187-197 
Embedded automatic thoughts, 
151-152 

Emotional functioning 
cognitive model, 30-31 
distinguishing thoughts from 
emotions, 159-161 
dysfunctional, 158 
effects of automatic thoughts, 
138-139 

goals of cognitive behavior therapy, 
158-159 

heightening, to elicit automatic 
thoughts, 143-144 
identifying hot cognitions, 142-143 
intensity of emotion, 164-166 
labeling emotions, 162-163 
mismatch of emotions and thoughts, 
161-162 

Emotional reasoning, 181/ 

Emotion Chart, 162/ 

Epicetus, 2 
Etiology 

case example, 43-44 
cognitive model, 3 


386 


Index 


European Association for Behavioural 
and Cognitive Therapies, 367 
Evaluation session 

assessment phase, 49-53 
communicating initial impressions 
from, 53 

family member participation in, 53 
goals of, 46, 47, 48 
patient’s understanding of, 47, 
48-49 

preparation for, 47, 48 
treatment planning after, 57-58 
Exposure therapy, 2, 265-267 


Family of patient in evaluation session, 
53 

Feedback 

case example, 76-79 
eliciting, 20, 22, 76 
importance of, 79 
negative, 120, 136 
potential problems in, 135-136 
purpose of, 20, 22, 76, 79 
second and subsequent sessions, 
119-120 

therapist self-evaluation questions, 
351 

Therapy Report for, 76, 77/ 359 
uncovering problems in therapy, 
347-348 
First session 

development of cognitive 
conceptualization after, 199 
discussion of diagnosis in, 65-68 
end of session summary, 74 
goals, 60, 79 

homework assignment, 67-68, 74-76 
mood check during, 62-63 
obtaining an update in, 63-65 
patient feedback, 76-79 
preparation for, 59-60 
problem identification in, 68 
setting agenda in, 60-62 
setting goals in, 69-70 
structure, 60 


G 

Gestalt therapy, 11, 251 
Goals 

of cognitive behavior therapy, 
158-159, 316 
for effective therapy, 333 
of evaluation session, 46, 47, 48 
for homework assignments, 27-28, 
295 

of initial session, 60 
initial treatment planning, case 
example of, 54-55 

pie chart formulation, 268-270, 269/ 
principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 8 

second and subsequent sessions, 101, 
112 

setting, in first therapy session, 

69-70 

step model for monitoring progress 
toward, 164-165, 165/ 
therapy review for progress toward, 
352, 353-354 

for therapy sessions, 21-22, 27 
Guided discovery, 10, 23-25, 371 


H 

Helplessness, 228, 231-232, 233/ 
Homework assignments 
amount of, 300 

anticipating problems in, 303-306 
behavioral skills training, 296-297 
case example, 297-299 
changing, 303-305 
checklist for, 309, 309/ 
clinical significance of, 294 
conceptualizing difficulties in, 308 
covert rehearsal for, 303-305 
evaluating therapy effectiveness, 
353, 372 

first session, 67-68, 74-76 
flexibility in assigning, 78-79 
goals, 27-28, 295 
individualization of, 300 
ongoing assignment, 22, 296-297 


Index 


387 


patient education about, 294-295, 
301 

patient role in setting, 296, 301 
planning, 28, 295-296, 300 
potential problems, 133, 134-135 
practical problems preventing 
completion of, 308-310 
preparing for negative outcomes, 
307-308 

problem solving, 296 
psychological obstacles to 
completion of, 310-312 
remembering, 27, 75, 302 
reviewing, 28, 108-110, 315, 338 
starting in therapy session, 302 
strategies to enhance compliance, 
295, 299-306 

striving for perfection in, 313-314 
therapist cognitions as source of 
problems in, 314-315 
Hot cognitions, 142-143 


Imagery, to restructure early 
memories, 251-255 

Imaginal automatic thoughts, 139, 146 
changing, 285-287 
distancing technique to reduce 
stress of, 290-293 
following to completion, 280-283 
identifying, 277-279 
imagining coping with, 284-285 
imagining future outcomes of, 284 
induced images in response to, 
289-293 

patient’s understanding of, 279-280 
reality testing, 287-288 
reduction of perceived threat of, 293 
repetition technique for, 288 
strategies for responding to, 280 
substituting for distressing images, 
288-289 

Imipramine, 5-6 

Individual conceptualization of patient 
and patient’s problems, 38-39 
homework assignment and, 300 


as principle of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 7 

treatment planning considerations, 
345 

Information processing 

in maintenance of core beliefs, 

32-33 
model, 34/ 
negative bias, 272 
Intermediate beliefs 

advantages and disadvantages of, 
211-212 

in assumption form for patient 
understanding, 211 
behavioral experiments to test, 
217-218 

case example, 42, 205-212 
in cognitive conceptualization 
diagram, 199, 201-203 
constructing alternatives to, 

212-213 
definition, 198 

educating patient about, 210-212 
formation of, 35 
hierarchy of, 201, 203/ 
identifying, 205-209, 227 
important, 209-210, 227 
influence of, 35 
therapeutic goals, 214 
therapy notes, 214 
See also Belief modification 
International Association for Cognitive 
Psychotherapy, 367 
Interpretation 

automatic thoughts versus, 150-151 
enduring patterns of, 7 
Interrupting patient, 22, 124-125 

M 

Magical change to imaginal automatic 
thought, 186 

Magnification/minimization, 181/ 
Mental filter, 181/ 

Mindfulness, 264 

Monitoring automatic thoughts, 296 
Mood check, 62-63, 102-105, 127-128 


388 


Index 


N 

Neurophysiological changes associated 
with cognitive behavior therapy, 4 
Nonverbal cues 

of hot cognitions, 142, 143 

0 

Obsessive thoughts, 260 
Outcomes studies, 4-5 
Overgeneralization, 182/ 

P 

Pace of therapy session, 351-352 
Panic disorders, 11 
Personality Belief Questionnaire, 209 
Personality disorders, resistance of 
core beliefs to modification in, 

230 

Personalization, as thinking error, 

182/ 

Pharmacotherapy, review of, 105 
Pie technique, 268-272, 269/ 

Pleasure 

automatic thoughts as obstacle to, 81 
identifying pleasurable activities, 

94- 99 

Pleasure and Mastery Rating Scale, 

95- 96, 95/ 

Point-counterpoint, 220 
Precipitating factors, 7 
Preparing for Therapy Worksheet, 101, 
102 / 

Principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 6-11 
Problem identification 

case example, 340-342, 344 
changing therapeutic focus in 
session, 343-344 
data gathering for, 340-342 
in first session, 68 
identifying; problematic situations, 
148-150 

prioritizing problems, 110-112, 340 


in second session, 101, 106 
treatment planning process, 340, 
342-343 

Problems in therapy 

cognitive conceptualization as 
source of, 350 

conceptualizing, 348-349, 350 
evaluating possible sources of, 
349-351, 355-356 
likelihood of, 346 
monitoring patient’s processing of 
session content, 354-355 
opportunities for therapeutic 
progress in, 346 

questions for identifying, 349-355 
review of therapy goals, 352 
strategies for remediating, 356-357 
therapeutic alliance as source of, 

350 

therapist’s cognitions as source of, 
357 

treatment planning as source of, 350 
uncovering, 346-348 
See also Problems with therapy 
structure 

Problem-solving skills training, 
256-258 

homework assignments, 296 
Problem-solving therapy, 2 
Problems with therapy structure 
in assigning homework, 134-135 
difficulties in eliciting automatic 
thoughts, 143-147 
in discussion of agenda items, 
133-134 

failure to make intervention, 134 
in homework review, 133 
identifying, 136, 351-352 
in making summaries, 135 
pacing issues, 134 
patient engagement-related, 125 
patient resistance to mood check, 
127-128 

rambling or unfocused updates, 
129-130 

in setting agenda, 130-133 
socialization-related, 125 
sources of, 123 


Index 


389 


therapeutic alliance-related, 126 
therapist cognitions as source of, 
123-124, 357 

unfocused discussion, 133-134 
unresolved distress at end of session, 
135-136 

in use of interruption, 124-125 
See also Problems in therapy 
Psychoanalysis, 1 

origins of cognitive therapy, 5 
Psychodynamic psychotherapy, 11 

R 

Rational emotive therapy, 2 
Reality testing of imaginal automatic 
thoughts, 287-288 
Refocusing, 260-263 
Relapse prevention 

booster sessions for, 327-331 
initiation in therapy, 101 
preparing for setbacks after 
termination, 325 
principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 9 

self-therapy sessions for, 325, 326/ 
strategies for, 318-322 
Relaxation techniques, 263-264 
Role play 

clinical applications, 267 
to elicit automatic thoughts, 145-146 
to enhance homework adherence, 
305-306 

to improve social skills, 267, 268 
intellectual-emotional, 305-306 
to modify beliefs, 220-222, 224-225 
to practice assertiveness, 267-268 
reconstruction of early experiences 
in, 248-251 

Rules, 35. See ato Intermediate beliefs 

s 

Safety behaviors, 266 
Schema, 33, 228 
Schema diagrams, 239 


Second and subsequent sessions 
agenda, 100-101 

hnal summary and feedback at close 
of, 118-120, 135-136 
goals, 101, 112, 120-121 
homework review, 108-110, 133 
introductory part, 101 
middle part, 112-117 
mood check, 102-105, 127-128 
patient preparation for, 101, 102/ 
periodic summarizing in, 117-118 
prioritizing problems in, 110-112 
problem identihcation in, 106-107, 
130-133 

rehnement of cognitive 
conceptualization in, 121 
shift of therapeutic focus, 120 
update of week in, 107-108, 129-130 
Self-comparison, 272-274 
Self-help books, 257 
Self-therapy sessions, 325, 326/ 

Session structure 

basic objectives, 11-12, 17, 21-22 

hrst session, 60 

guide, 336-339 

identifying problems in, 123 

length, 3 

pacing, 351-352 

patient feedback, 22 

patient understanding of, 101 

planning, 21 

as source of problems, 351-352 
See ato Evaluation session; First 
session; Second and subsequent 
sessions 

“Should” and “must” statements, 182/ 
Socializing patient, 125, 352-353, 355 
Social skills, 267-268 
Socratic questioning, 140-141 
case example, 193-194, 215-217 
in cognitive behavior therapy, 10-11 
to construct or modify beliefs, 213, 
215-217, 227 

to evaluate automatic thoughts, 
170-171 

for testing of imaginal automatic 
thoughts, 287-288 
See also Guided discovery 


390 


Index 


Strengths orientation, 26-27 
changing self-comparison to, 
272-274 

credit list assignment, 274-276 
Substance abuse, 11 
Suicidal ideation or behavior, 50, 63, 
68, 102, 105 
Supervision, 349, 360 

T 

Temporal focus, 8-9 
Termination of therapy 

booster sessions after, 327-331 
early preparation for, 316-318 
patient concerns about tapering 
sessions, 322-324 
planning for, 333-334 
preparing patient for setbacks after, 
325 

review of therapy sessions prior to, 
324-325 

self-therapy plan after, 325, 326/ 
Testing Your Thoughts Worksheet, 187, 
196-197, 196/ 

Therapeutic alliance 

clinical signihcance, 17, 21 
first session goals, 79 
good counseling skills for, 18-19 
patient response to interruption, 
124-125 

principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 7-8 

role of patient feedback in 
strengthening, 79 
sensitivity to patient feedback, 20 
as source of problems in therapy, 

350 

strategies for building, 17-21, 126 
strategies for strengthening, 126 
therapist disclosure of automatic 
thoughts, 180 

therapist disclosure of beliefs, 227 
in treatment planning, 19-20 
Therapeutic techniques and processes 
behavioral activation, 81-97 
case write-up, 361-365 


changing self-comparison, 272-274 
Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale to 
evaluate, 368-374 
dealing with difficult problems, 
116-117 

decision-making skills training, 
258-260 
emphasis, 11 

exposure therapy, 265-267 
formulating new beliefs, 212-213 
graph of therapeutic progress, 

317- 318, 317/ 

identihcation of automatic thoughts, 
36 

identifying core and intermediate 
beliefs, 205-209 

interrupting patient, 22, 124-125 
introduction of cognitive behavior 
therapy approach, 13-14 
patient engagement with, 125 
patient resistance to forms, 127-128 
patient socialization and, 125 
pie technique, 268-272 
positive orientation, 26-27, 107-108, 
159 

preparing for setbacks in, 320-322 
principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 7-11 

problem-solvins skills traininff, 
256-258 
range of, 10-11 
refocusing attention, 260-263 
relapse prevention strategies, 

318- 322 

relaxation techniques, 263-264 
responding to imaginal automatic 
thoughts, 280-289 
scope of, 16, 256 

therapist cognitions interfering with 
therapy structure, 123-124 
therapist expertise in, 12-13, 14-16, 
358, 360 

therapist notes, 121-122 
therapist self-evaluation after 
session, 339 

therapist’s hrst application of 
cognitive behavior therapy, 360 
third session and beyond, 120-122 


Index 


391 


See also Belief modification; 

Homework assignments; Problems 
with therapy structure; Session 
structure; Termination of therapy; 
Therapeutic alliance 
Therapist qualities 

Cognitive Therapy Rating Scale to 
evaluate, 368-374 
developing expertise in cognitive 
behavior therapy, 12-13, 14-16, 
358, 360 

self-assessment for problems, 351 
self-assessment of cognitions and 
affect, 14-15, 124, 358-359 
therapist cognitions interfering with 
therapy structure, 123-124, 357 
Therapy notes, 188-191 
on old and new beliefs, 214 
Therapy Report, 76, 77/ 359 
Therapy structure 
booster sessions, 316 
duration, 56 
frequency, 56, 316 
number of sessions, 39 
patient expectations, 56 
phases, 333-334 
principles of cognitive behavior 
therapy, 9-10 

tapering near termination, 322-324 
See also Problems with therapy 
structure; Session structure 
Thought Record, 160, 187, 192-194, 
195/ 

Treatment planning 

after evaluation session, 57-58 
agenda setting in first session, 60-62 
basic process, 21-22 


building therapeutic alliance in, 
19-20 

case example, 54-55, 58 
case write-up, 364 
essential elements of, 332 
goals, 21 

individualization, 345 
patient role in, 8, 55-56 
phases, 333-334 

problem analysis for, 334, 335-336/ 
problem identification and focus, 
340-344 
revising, 334 
session plans, 336-339 
as source of problems in therapy, 
350, 351 

for specific disorders, 344-345 
therapeutic goals, 333 
therapist expertise in, 13 
See also Cognitive conceptualization 
Tunnel vision, 182/ 

u 

Unlovability, 228, 231-232, 233/ 

V 

Visualization, to elicit automatic 
thoughts, 144-145 

w 

Worthlessness, 228, 231-232, 233/ 



