An Easy-to-follow Version 
of the Classic 
Introduction to Yoga 



'Mr Iyengar's Light on Yoga has, since it was first published over 
25 years ago, enabled many to follow his example . . . 

This new concise edition will bring the basic art of yoga to a 
much wider audience and will enable it to be practised 
at the very highest level.' 

Yehudi Menuhin 

The Illustrated Light on Yoga is a straightforward and comprehensive 
introduction for the beginner by the acknowledged expert on the 
subject. Illustrated throughout with 150 photographs carefully positioned 
in the relevant part of the text for easy reference, it includes: 

■ An introduction to the philosophy and practice of yoga 
■ Detailed descriptions of 57 key postures 
■ Techniques for stilling the mind through breathing exercises 
■ A 35 -week course progressing from beginner to 

intermediate level 
■ A full glossary of yoga terms 

B K S Iyengar has been teaching and demonstrating yoga 
for more than 50 years. He has several million students and has 
established centres all over the world. 



Rs. 250 

ttm 81-7 22 I -6 Q i 




a 0 2 5 0 




For sale in the Indian subcontinent only 


HEALTH /YOGA 





The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


B. K. S. Iyengar's classic book Light on Yoga is a comprehensive 
introduction to yoga with detailed descriptions of over 200 
postures (asanas) and 14 breathing exercises (pranayamas). 
This book, The Illustrated Light on Yoga , introduces 57 key asanas 
and provides a brief summary of pranayama. The book is 
illustrated throughout with photographs positioned in the 
relevant part of the text. The student can, therefore, practise a 
posture without the aid of a teacher. An Appendix provides an 
asana course for the continuing student. The Illustrated Light on 
Yoga is a comprehensive yet straightforward introduction for 
the beginner by the acknowledged expert on the subject. 



By the same author: 


LIGHT ON YOGA 
LIGHT ON PRANAYAMA 

LIGHT ON THE YOGA SUTRAS OF PATANJAL1 
THE TREE OF YOGA 


THE ILLUSTRATED 



Yoga Dipika 


B. K. S. IYENGAR 

Foreword by Yehudi Menuhin 



HarperCollins Publishers India 
a joint venture with 



New Delhi 



1 1 arperC o| \ i ns Pit b Ushers 1 nd i a 
a joint venture with 
The India Today Group 
by arrangement with 
HarperCollins Publishers Limited 

First published b> George Allen & l nwin 1 966 
This abridged edition first published as 
The Concise Light on Yoga by I 'nwin Paperback 1980 
l arge formal edition first published by the Aquarian Press 1 993 
Thorsons edition 1 995 

s 

First published in India by 
HarperCollirts Publishers India 1997 

Tenth impression 2005 

Copyright V George Allen & I nwin (Publishers) Ud 1966, 1968, 1976. 1980 

B.K S. Iyengar asserts the moral right 
to be identified as !he author of this work 

All rights reserved No pan of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the publishers. 

Hai perC oiling Publish m 

I A Hamilton House, Connaught Place. New Delhi t It) 001, India 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road, London \V6 HJR, United Kingdom 
Hazelton 1 anes, 55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900. Toronto, Ontario \I5R 3L2 
and 1995 Markham Road. Scarborough, Ontario M I B 5M8, Canada 
25 Ryde Road. Pymbl<- Sydney, NSW 2073, Australia 
3 1 View Road. Glcnlteld, Auckland 1 0, New Zealand 
10 East 53rd Street. New York N Y 10022, USA 


Printed and bound at 
Thomson Press (India) [ id 



DEDICATED TO MY REVERED GURU]! 


Samkya-yoga-&ikhdtnam; Veda-kesari; Veddntavdgiia; 
Nydydchdrya; Mimdmsa-ratna; Mimdmsa-thirtha 

Professor, Sriman, T, Krishnamacharya of 
Mysore (South India), India 





PRAYER 


'I bow before the noblest of sages, Patanjali, who 
brought serenity of mind by his work on yoga, clarity 
of speech by his work on grammar and purity of body 
by his work on medicine/ 

'I salute Adisvara (the Primeval Lord 6iva) who taught 
first the science of Hatha Yoga - a science that stands 
out as a ladder for those who wish to scale the heights 
of Raja Yoga/ 




Contents 


page 

FOREWORD BY YEHUDI MENUHIN Xi 

PREFACE Xiii 

Part I: What is Yoga? 1 

The Stages of Yoga 3 

Part II: Yogasanas 37 

Hints and Cautions 37 

Technique and Effects of Asanas 41 

Part JII: Prartayama 117 

Hints and Cautions 117 

Technique and Effects of Pranayama 123 

appendix: as an a courses 131 

TABLE OF ASANAS 139 

GLOSSARY 141 

INTERNATIONAL ADDRESSES 157 

INDEX 159 




Foreword 

by Yehudi Menuhin 


The practice of Yoga induces a primary sense of measure and pro- 
portion. Reduced to our own body, our first instrument, we learn to play 
it, drawing from it maximum resonance and harmony. With unflagging 
patience we refine and animate every cell as we return daily to the 
attack, unlocking and liberating capacities otherwise condemned to frus- 
tration and death. 

Each unfulfilled area of tissue and nerve, of brain or lung, is a chal- 
lenge to our will and integrity, or otherwise a source of frustration and 
death. Whoever has had the privilege of receiving Mr Iyengar's atten- 
tion, or of witnessing the precision, refinement and beauty of his art, 
is introduced to that vision of perfection and innocence which is man 
as first created - unarmed, unashamed, son of God, lord of creation - 
in the Garden of Eden. The tree of knowledge has indeed yielded much 
fruit of great variety, sweet, poisonous, bitter, wholesome according to 
our use of it. But is it not more imperative than ever that we cultivate 
the tree, that we nourish its roots? 

The practice of Yoga over the past thirty years has convinced me that 
most of our fundamental attitudes to life have their physical counter- 
parts in the body. Thus comparison and criticism must begin with the 
alignment of our own left and right sides to a degree at which even 
finer adjustments are feasible: or strength of will may cause us to start 
by stretching the body from the toes to the top of the head in defiance 
of gravity. Impetus and ambition might begin with the sense of weight 
and speed that comes with free-swinging limbs, instead of the control 
of prolonged balance on foot, feet or hands, which gives poise. Tenacity 
is gained by stretching in various Yoga postures for minutes at a time, 
while calmness comes with quiet, consistent breathing and the expan- 
sion of the lungs. Continuity and a sense of the universal come with 
the knowledge of the inevitable alternation of tension and relaxation in 
eternal rhythms of which each inhalation and exhalation constitutes one 
cycle, wave or vibration among the countless myriads which are the 
universe. 

What is the alternative? Thwarted, warped people condemning the 
order of things, cripples criticizing the upright, autocrats slumped in 
expectant coronary attitudes, the tragic spectacle of people working out 
their own imbalance and frustration on others. 



Yoga, as practised by Mr Iyengar, is the dedicated votive offering of 
a man who brings himself to the altar, alone and clean in body and mind, 
focussed in attention and will, offering in simplicity and innocence not 
a burnt sacrifice, but simply himself raised to his own highest potential. 

It is a technique ideally suited to prevent physical and mental illness 
and to protect the body generally, developing an inevitable sense of 
self-reliance and assurance. By its very nature it is inextricably associated 
with universal laws: respect for life, truth, and patience are all indispens- 
able factors in the drawing of a quiet breath, in calmness of mind and 
firmness of will. 

In this lie the moral virtues inherent in Yoga. For these reasons it 
demands a complete and total effort, involving and forming the whole 
human being. No mechanical repetition is involved and no lip-service 
as in the case of good resolutions or formal prayers. By its very nature 
it is each time and every moment a living act. 

Mr Iyengar's Light on Yoga has, since it was first published in 1966, 
enabled many to follow his example and become teachers to carry on 
his work. I was glad at the time to share in its presentation and I wel- 
come this new concise edition equally enthusiastically. It will bring the 
basic art of Yoga to a much wider audience and will enable it to be 
practised at the very highest level. 


London, 1980 


Preface 


It is only thanks to the persistent encouragement of my devoted friends 
and pupils that this book is now achieved - for alone I would have 
repeatedly faltered not only because of my inadequate command of the 
English language but because I would have lost heart without their 
buoyant support and assurance. 

Yoga is a timeless pragmatic science evolved over thousands of years 
dealing with the physical, moral, mental and spiritual well-being of man 
as a whole. 

The first took to systematize this practice was the classic treatise the 
Yoga Sutras (or Aphorisms) of Patanjali dating from 200 bc. Unfortu- 
nately most of the books published on Yoga in our day have been 
unworthy of both the subject and its first great exponent, as they are 
superficial, popular and at times misleading. I have even been asked by 
their readers whether I can drink acid, chew glass, walk through fire, 
make myself invisible or perform other magical acts. Scholarly and 
reliable expositions of the religious and philosophical texts already exist 
in most languages - but the practice of an art is more difficult to com- 
municate than a purely literary or philosophical concept. 

The original title of this book was The Concise Light on Yoga. Based 
upon my Light on Yoga , which describes simply but in great detail the 
asanas (postures) and pranayamas (breathing disciplines), this book pro- 
vides a comprehensive introduction to yoga. It describes the techniques 
for 57 asanas with the aid of 146 photographs and it also covers pranay- 
ama with the aid of another four photographs. This new large format 
edition makes it even more accessible. 

The Western reader may be surprised at the recurring reference to 
the Universal Spirit, to mythology and even to philosophical and moral 
principles. He must not forget that in ancient times all the higher 
achievements of man, in knowledge, art and power, were part of 
religion and were assumed to belong to God and to His priestly servants 
on earth. The Catholic Pope is the last such embodiment of divine know- 
ledge and power in the West. But formerly, even in the Western world, 
music, painting, architecture, philosophy and medicine, as well as wars, 
were always in the service of God. It is only very recently in India that 
these arts and sciences have begun to shake off the Divine - but with 
due respect, for the emancipation of man's will, as distinct from the 



r 


xiv Preface 


Divine will, we in India continue to value the purity of purpose, the 
humility of discipline and the selflessness that are the legacy of our long 
bondage to God. I consider it important as well as interesting that the 
reader should know the origin of asanas, and I have, therefore, included 
legends handed down by practising yogis and sages. 

All the ancient commentaries on yoga have stressed that it is essential 
to work under the direction of a guru (Master), and although my experi- 
ence proves the wisdom of this rule, I have endeavoured with all humil- 
ity in this book to guide the reader - both teacher and student - to a 
correct and safe method of mastering these asanas and pranayamas. 

In the Appendix, I have introduced a 35 weeks' course for the intense 
practitioner, grouping the asanas stage by stage according to their 
structure. 

Study in detail the hints and cautions before attempting the asana 
and pranayama techniques. 

I am sincerely grateful to my esteemed friend and pupil Mr Yehudi 
Menuhin for his foreword and immeasurable support. 

I am indebted to my pupil Mr B. I. Taraporewala for his collaboration 
in the preparation of this book. 

I express my sincere gratitude to Messrs G. G. Welling of Poona 
(India), for their personal supervision and interest in taking innumerable 
photographs for me and for placing the resources of their studio at my 
disposal. 


B. K. S. IYENGAR 


PART I 


What is Yoga? 


The word Yoga is derived from the Sanskrit root yuj meaning to bind, 
join, attach and yoke, to direct and concentrate one's attention on, to 
use and apply. It also means union or communion. It is the true union 
of our will with the will of God. 'It thus means, says Mahadev Desai 
in his introduction to the Gita according to Gandhi , 'the yoking of all the 
powers of body, mind and soul to God; it means the disciplining of the 
intellect, the mind, the emotions, the will, which that Yoga presupposes; 
it means a poise of the soul which enables one to look at life in all its 
aspects evenly/ 

Yoga is one of the six orthodox systems of Indian philosophy. It was 
collated, co-ordinated and systematized by Patanjali in his classical 
work, the Yoga Sutras , which consists of 185 terse aphorisms. In Indian 
thought, everything is permeated by the Supreme Universal Spirit 
(Paramatma or God) of which the individual human spirit (jlvatma) 
is a part. The system of yoga is so called because it teaches the 
means by which the jlvatma can be united to, or be in communion with 
the Paramatma, and so secure liberation (moksa). 

One who follows the path of Yoga is a yogi or yogin. 

In the sixth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita , which is the most important 
authority on Yoga philosophy, Sri Krishna explains to Arjuna the mean- 
ing of Yoga as a deliverance from contact with pain and sorrow . It is said: 

'When his mind, intellect and self (ahamkara) are under control, 
freed from restless desire, so that they rest in the spirit within, a 
man becomes a Yukta - one in communion with God. A lamp does 
not flicker in a place where no winds blow; so it is with a yogi, 
who controls his mind, intellect and self, being absorbed in the 
spirit within him. When the restlessness of the mind, intellect and 
self is stilled through the practice of Yoga, the yogi by the grace 
of the Spirit within himself finds fulfilment. Then he knows the 
joy eternal which is beyond the pale of the senses which his reason 
cannot grasp. He abides in this reality and moves not therefrom. 

He has found the treasure above all others. There is nothing higher 
than this. He who has achieved it, shall not be moved by the 
greatest sorrow. This is the real meaning of Yoga - a deliverance 
from contact with pain and sorrow. 


r 


2 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

As a well cut diamond has many facets, each reflecting a different 
colour of light, so does the word yoga, each facet reflecting a differ- 
ent shade of meaning and revealing different aspects of the entire 
range of human endeavour to win inner peace and happiness. 

The Bhagavad Gltd also gives other explanations of the term yoga and 
lays stress upon Karma Yoga (Yoga by action). It is said: 'Work alone 
is your privilege, never the fruits thereof. Never let the fruits of action 
be your motive; and never cease to work. Work in the name of the Lord, 
abandoning selfish desires. Be not affected by success or failure. This 
equipoise is called Yoga/ 

Yoga has also been described as wisdom in work or skilful living 
amongst activities with harmony and moderation. 'Yoga is not for him 
who gorges too much, nor for him who starves himself. It is not for 
him who sleeps too much, nor for him who stays awake. By moderation 
in eating and in resting, by regulation in working and by concordance 
in sleeping and waking. Yoga destroys all pain and sorrow.' 

The Kathopanishad describes Yoga thus: 'When the senses are stilled, 
when the mind is at rest, when the intellect wavers not - then, say the 
wise, is reached the highest stage. This steady control of the senses and 
mind has been defined as Yoga. He who attains it is free from delusion.' 

In the second aphorism of the first chapter of the Yoga Sutras , Patanjali 
describes Yoga as 'chitta vrtti nirodhah ' . This may be translated as the 
restraint (nirodhah) of mental (chitta) modifications (vrtti) or as sup- 
pression (nirodhah) of the fluctuations (vrtti) of consciousness (chitta). 
The word chitta denotes the mind in its total or collective sense as being 
composed of three categories: 

(a) mind (manas, that is, the individual mind having the power and 
faculty of attention, selection and rejection; it is the oscillating 
indecisive faculty of the mind); 

(b) intelligence or reason (buddhi, that is, the decisive state which 
determines the distinction between things); 

(c) ago (ahamkara, literally the I-maker, the state which ascertains that 
'I know'). 

The word vrtti is derived from the Sanskrit root vrt meaning to turn, to 
revolve, to roll on. It thus means course of action, behaviour, mode of 
being, condition or mental state. Yoga is the method by which the rest- 
less mind is calmed and the energy directed into constructive channels. 
As a mighty river which when properly harnessed by dams and canals, 
creates a vast reservoir of water, prevents famine and provides abundant 
power for industry; so also the mind, when controlled, provides a reser- 
voir of peace and generates abundant energy for human uplift. 

The problem of controlling the mind is not capable of easy solution. 




What 

as borne out by the following dialogue in the sixth chapter of the Bhaga- 
vad Gita. Arjuna asks Sri Krishna: 

'Krishna, you have told me of Yoga as a communion with Brahman 
(the Universal Spirit), which is ever one. But how can this be per- 
manent, since the mind is so restless and inconsistent? The mind 
is impetuous and stubborn, strong and wilful, as difficult to har- 
ness as the wind/ Sri Krishna replies: 'Undoubtedly, the mind is 
restless and hard to control. But it can be trained by constant 
practice (abhyasa) and by freedom from desire (vairagya). A man 
who cannot control his mind will find it difficult to attain this 
divine communion; but the self-controlled man can attain it if he 
tries hard and directs his energy by the right means.' 


THE STAGES OF YOGA 

The right means are just as important as the end in view. Patanjali 
enumerates these means as the eight limbs or stages of Yoga for the 
quest of the soul. They are: 

1. Yama (universal moral commandments); 

2. Niyama (self purification by discipline); 

3. Asana (posture); 

4. Pranayama (rhythmic control of the breath); 

5. Pratyahara (withdrawal and emancipation of the mind from the 
domination of the senses and exterior objects); 

6. Dharaiia (concentration); 

7. Dhyana (meditation); 

8. Samadhi (a state of super-consciousness brought about by profound 
meditation, in which the individual aspirant (sadhaka) becomes one 
with the object of his meditation - Paramatma or the Universal 
Spirit). 

Yama and Niyama control the yogi's passions and emotions and keep 
him in harmony with his fellow man. Asanas keep the body healthy 
and strong and in harmony with nature. Finally, the yogi becomes free 
of body consciousness. He conquers the body and renders it a fit vehicle 
for the soul. The first three stages are the outward quests (bahiranga 
sadhana). 

The next two stages, Pranayama and Pratyahara, teach the aspirant 
to regulate the breathing, and thereby control the mind. This helps to 
free the senses from the thraldom of the objects of desire. These two 
stages of Yoga are known as the inner quests (antaranga sadhana). 
Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi take the yogi into the innermost 


is Yoga? 3 



f 


4 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

recesses of his soul. The yogi does not look heavenward to find God. 
He knows that he is within, being known as the Antaratma (the Inner 
Self). The last three stages keep him in harmony with himself and his 
Maker. These stages are called antaratma sadhana, the quest of the soul. 

By profound meditation, the knower, the knowledge and the known 
become one. The seer, the sight and the seen have no separate existence 
from each other. It is like a great musician becoming one with his instru- 
ment and the music that comes from it. Then, the yogi stands in his 
own nature and realizes his self (Atman), the part of the Supreme Soul 
within himself. 

There are different paths (margas) by which a man travels to his 
Maker. The active man finds realization through Karma Marga, in which 
a man realizes his own divinity through work and duty. The emotional 
man finds it through Bhakti Marga, where there is realization through 
devotion to and love of a personal God. The intellectual man pursues 
Jnana, Marga, where realization comes through knowledge. The medi- 
tative or reflective man follows Yoga .Marga, and realizes his own div- 
inity through control of the mind. 

Happy is the man who knows how to distinguish the real from the 
unreal, the eternal from the transient and the good from the pleasant 
by his discrimination and wisdom. Twice blessed is he who knows true 
love and can love all God's creatures. He who works selflessly for the 
welfare of others with love in his heart is thrice blessed. But the man 
who combines within his mortal frame knowledge, love and selfless 
service is holy and becomes a place of pilgrimage, like the confluence 
of the rivers Ganga, Saraswatl and Jamuna. Those who meet him 
become calm and purified. 

Mind is the king of the senses. One who has conquered his mind, 
senses, passions, thought and reason is a king among men. He is fit 
for Raja Yoga, the royal union with the Universal Spirit. He has Inner 
Light. 

He who has conquered his mind is Raja Yogi. The word raja means 
a king. The expression Raja Yoga implies a complete mastery of the Self. 
Though Patanjali explains the ways to control the mind, he nowhere 
states in his aphorisms that this science is Raja Yoga, but calls it A$tanga 
Yoga or the eight stages (limbs) of Yoga. As it implies complete mastery 
of the self one may call it the science of Raja Yoga. 

Swaztmarama, the author of the Hatha Yoga Pradtpikd (hatha = force 
or determined effort) called the same path Hatha Yoga because it 
demanded rigorous discipline. 

It is generally believed that Raja Yoga &nd Hatha Yoga are entirely 
distinct, different and opposed to each other, that the Yoga Sutras of 
Patanjali deal with Spiritual discipline and that the Hatha Yoga Pradtpikd 
of Swatmarama deals solely with physical discipline. It is not so, for 


L 


5 


What is Yoga? 

Hatha Yoga and Raja Yoga complement each other and form a single 
approach towards Liberation. As a mountaineer needs ladders, ropes 
and crampons as well as physical fitness and discipline to climb the icy 
peaks of the Himalayas, so does the Yoga aspirant need the knowledge 
and discipline of the Hatha Yoga of Swatmarama to reach the heights 
of Raja Yoga dealt with by Patanjali. 

This path of Yoga is the fountain for the other three paths. It brings 
calmness and tranquillity and prepares the mind for absolute unquali- 
fied self-surrender to God, in which all these four paths merge into one. 


Chitta Vrtti ( Causes for the Modification of the Mind ) 

In his Yoga Sutras Patanjali lists five classes of chitta vrtti which create 
pleasure and pain. These are: 

1. Pramana (a standard or ideal), by which things or values are 
measured by the mind or known, which men accept upon (a) direct 
evidence such as perception (pratyak§a), (b) inference (anumana) and 
(c) testimony or the word of an acceptable authority when the source 
of knowledge has been checked as reliable and trustworthy (agama). 

2. Viparyaya (a mistaken view which is observed to be such after study). 
A faulty medical diagnosis based on wrong hypotheses, or the formerly 
held theory in astronomy that the Sun rotates round the Earth, are 
examples of viparyaya. 

3. Vikalpa (fancy or imagination, resting merely on verbal expression 
without any factual basis). A beggar may feel happy when he imagines 
himself spending millions. A rich miser, on the other hand, may starve 
himself in the belief that he is poor. 

4 . Nidra (sleep), where there is the absence of ideas and experiences. 
When a man is sleeping soundly, he does not recall his name, family 
or status, his knowledge or wisdom, or even his own existence. When a 
man forgets himself in sleep, he wakes up refreshed. But, if a disturbing 
thought creeps into his mind when he is dropping off, he will not resf 
properly. 

5. Smrti (memory, the holding fast of the impressions of objects that 
one has experienced). There are people who live in their past experi- 
ences, even though the past is beyond recall. Their sad or happy 
memories keep them chained to the past and they cannot break their 
fetters. 

Patanjali enumerates five causes of chitta vrtti creating pain (kleSa). 
These are: 


6 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 



1. Avidya (ignorance or nescience); 

2. asmita (the feeling of individuality which limits a person and 
distinguishes him from a group and which may be physical, mental, 
intellectual or emotional); 

3. raga (attachment or passion); 

4. dvesa (aversion or revulsion); 

5. abhinivesa (love or thirst for life, the instinctive clinging to worldly 
life and bodily enjoyment and the fear that one may be cut off from 
all this by death). 

These causes of pain remain submerged in the mind of the sadhaka (the 
aspirant or seeker). They are like icebergs barely showing their heads 
in the polar seas. So long as they are not studiously controlled and 
eradicated, there can be no peace. The yogi learns to forget the past and 
takes no thought for the morrow. He lives in the eternal present. 

As a breeze ruffles the surface of a lake and distorts the images 
reflected therein, so also the chitta vytti disturb the peace of mind. The 
still waters of a lake reflect the beauty around it. When the mind is still, 
the beauty of the Self is seen reflected in it. The yogi stills his mind by 
constant study and by freeing himself from desires. The eight stages of 
Yoga teach him the way. 

Chitta Viksepa ( Distractions and Obstacles) 

The distractions and obstacles which hinder the aspirant's practice of 
Yoga are: 

1. Vyadhi - sickness which disturbs the physical equilibrium 

2. Sty ana - languor or lack of mental disposition for work 

3. Samsaya - doubt or indecision 

4. Pramada - indifference or insensibility 

5. Alasya - laziness 

6. Avirati - sensuality, the rousing of desire when sensory objects 
possess the mind 

7. Bhranti Darsana - false or invalid knowledge, or illusion 

8. Alabdha Bhumikatva - failure to attain continuity of thought or 
concentration so that reality cannot be seen 

9. Anavasthitattva - instability in holding on to concentration which 
has been attained after long practice. 

There are, however, four more distractions: (a) duhkha - pain or misery, 
(b) daurmanasya - despair, (c) angamejayatva - unsteadiness of the 
body and (d) svasa-prasvasa - unsteady respiration. 

To win a battle, a general surveys the terrain and the enemy and 
plans counter-measures. In a similar way the Yogi plans the conquest 
of the Self. 



What is Yoga? 


7 


1. Vyadhi. It will be noticed that the very first obstacle is ill-health or 
sickness. To the yogi his body is the prime instrument of attainment. If 
his vehicle breaks down, the traveller cannot go far. If the body is broken 
by ill-health, the aspirant can achieve little. Physical health is important 
for mental development, as normally the mind functions through the 
nervous system. When the body is sick or the nervous system is affected, 
the mind becomes restless or dull and inert and concentration or medi- 
tation become impossible. 

2. Stydna. A person suffering from languor has no goal, no path to 
follow and no enthusiasm. His mind and intellect become dull due to 
inactivity and their faculties rust. Constant flow keeps a mountain 
stream pure, but water in a ditch stagnates and nothing good can 
flourish in it. A listless person is like a living corpse for he can concen- 
trate on nothing. 

3. Samsaya. The unwise, the faithless and the doubter destroy them- 
selves. How can they enjoy this world or the next or have any happi- 
ness? The seeker should have faith in himself and his master. He should 
have faith that God is ever by his side and that no evil can touch him. 
As faith springs up in the heart it dries out lust, ill-will, mental sloth, 
spiritual pride and doubt, and the heart free from these hindrances 
becomes serene and untroubled. 

4. Pramada. A person suffering from pramada is full of self-importance, 
lacks any humility and believes that he alone is wise. No doubt he 
knows what is right or wrong, but he persists in his indifference to the 
right and chooses what is pleasant. To gratify his selfish passions and 
dreams of personal glory, he will deliberately and without scruple sacri- 
fice everyone who stands in his way. Such a person is blind of God's 
glory and deaf to His words. 

5. Alasya. To remove the obstacle of laziness, unflagging enthusiasm 
(vlrya) is needed. The attitude of the aspirant is like that of a lover ever 
yearning to meet the beloved but never giving way to despair. Hope 
should be his shield and courage his sword. He should be free from 
hate and sorrow. With faith and enthusiasm he should overcome the 
inertia of the body and the mind. 

6. Avimti. This is the tremendous craving for sensory objects after they 
have been consciously abandoned, which is so hard to restrain. Without 
being attached to the objects of sense, the yogi learns to enjoy them 
with the aid of the senses which are completely under his control. By 
the practice of pratyahara he wins freedom from attachment and emanci- 
pation from desire and becomes content and tranquil. 



8 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


7. Bhranti Darsana. A person afflicted by false knowledge suffers from 
delusion and believes that he alone has seen the true Light. He has a 
powerful intellect but lacks humility and makes a show of wisdom. By 
remaining in the company of great souls and through their guidance he 
sets his foot firmly on the right path and overcomes his weakness. 

8. Alabdha Bhumikatva. As a mountain climber fails to reach the summit 
for lack of stamina, so also a person who cannot overcome the inability 
to concentrate is unable to seek reality. He might have had glimpses of 
reality but he cannot see clearly. He is like a musician who has heard 
divine music in a dream, but who is unable to recall it in his waking 
moments and cannot repeat the dream. 

9. Anavasthitattva. A person affected with anavasthitattva has by hard 
work come within sight of reality. Happy and proud of his achievements 
he becomes slack in his practice (sadhana). He has purity and great 
power of concentration and has come to the final cross-roads of his 
quest. Even at this last stage continuous endeavour is essential and he 
has to pursue the path with infinite patience and determined persever- 
ance and must never show slackness which hampers progress on the 
path of God realization. He must wait until divine grace descends upon 
him. It has been said in the Kathopanisad : The Self is not to be realized 
by study and instruction, nor by subtlety of intellect, nor by much learn- 
ing, but only by him who longs for Him, by the one whom He chooses. 
Verily to such a one the Self reveals His true being. 

To overcome the obstacles and to win unalloyed happiness, Patanjali 
offered several remedies. The best of these is the fourfold remedy of 
Maitri (friendliness), Karuna (compassion), Mudita (delight) and Upeksa 
(disregard). 

1. Maitri is not merely friendliness, but also a feeling of oneness with 
the object of friendliness (atmlyata). A mother feels intense happiness 
at the success of her children because of atmlyata, a feeling of oneness. 
Patanjali recommends maitri for sukha (happiness or virtue). The yogi 
cultivates maitri and atmlyata for the good and turns enemies into 
friends, bearing malice towards none. 

2. Karuna is not merely showing pity or compassion and shedding tears 
of despair at the misery (duhkha) of others. It is compassion coupled 
with devoted action to relieve the misery of the afflicted. The yogi uses 
all his resources - physical, economic, mental or moral - to alleviate the 
pain and suffering of others. He shares his strength with the weak until 
they become strong. He shares his courage with those that are timid 
until they become brave by his example. He denies the maxim of the 
'survival of the fittest 7 , but makes the weak strong enough to survive. 
He becomes a shelter to one and all. 


What is Yoga? 9 


3. Mudita is a feeling of delight at the good work (punya) done by 
another, even though he may be a rival. Through mudita, the yogi 
saves himself from much heart-burning by not showing anger, hatred 
or jealousy for another who has reached the desired goal which he 
himself has failed to achieve. 

4. Upeksa: It is not merely a feeling of disdain or contempt for the 
person who has fallen into vice (apunya) or one of indifference or superi- 
ority towards him. It is a searching self-examination to find out how 
one would have behaved when faced with the same temptations. It is 
also an examination to see how far one is responsible for the state into 
which the unfortunate one has fallen and the attempt thereafter to put 
him on the right path. The yogi understands the faults of others by 
seeing and studying them first in himself. This self-study teaches him 
to be charitable to all. 

The deeper significance of the fourfold remedy of maitri, karuna, mudita 
and upeksa cannot be felt by an unquiet mind. My experience has led 
me to conclude that for an ordinary man or woman in any community 
of the world, the way to achieve a quiet mind is to work with determi- 
nation on two of the eight stages of Yoga mentioned by Patanjali, 
namely, asana and pranayama. 

The mind (manas) and the breath (prana) are intimately connected 
and the activity or the cessation of activity of one affects the other. 
Hence Patanjali recommended pranayama (rhythmic breath control) for 
achieving mental equipoise and inner peace. 


Sisya and Guru (A Pupil and a Master) 

The Siva Samhitd divides sadhakas (pupils or aspirants) into four classes. 
They are (1) mrdu (feeble), (2) madhyama (average), (3) adhimatra 
(superior) and (4) adhimatra tama (the supreme one). The last, the high- 
est, is alone able to cross beyond the ocean of the manifest world. 

The feeble seekers are those who lack enthusiasm, criticize their 
teachers/ are rapacious, inclined to bad action, eat much, are in the 
power of women, unstable, cowardly, ill, dependent, speak harshly, 
have weak characters and lack virility. The Guru (Teacher or Master) 
guides such seekers in the path of Mantra Yoga only. With much effort, 
the sadhaka can reach enlightenment in twelve years. (The word mantra 
is derived from the root 'man', meaning to think. Mantra thus means a 
sacred thought or prayer to be repeated with full understanding of its 
meaning. It takes a long time, perhaps years, for a mantra to take firm 
root in the mind of a feeble sadhaka and still longer for it to bear fruit.) 

Of even mind, capable of bearing hardship, wishing to perfect the 


10 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


work, speaking gently, moderate in all circumstances, such is the aver- 
age seeker. Recognizing these qualities, the Guru teaches him Laya 
Yoga, which gives liberation. (Laya means devotion, absorption or dis- 
solution.) 

Of stable mind, capable of Laya Yoga, virile, independent, noble, 
merciful, forgiving, truthful, brave, young, respectful, worshipping his 
teacher, intent on the practice of Yoga, such is a superior seeker. He 
can reach enlightenment after six years of practice. The Guru instructs 
this forceful man in Hatha Yoga. 

Of great virility and enthusiasm, good looking, courageous, learned 
in scriptures, studious, sane in mind, not melancholic, keeping young, 
regular in food, with his senses under control, free from fear, clean, 
skilful, generous, helpful to all, firm, intelligent, independent, forgiv- 
ing, of good character, of gentle speech and worshipping his Guru, such 
is a supreme seeker, fit for all forms of Yoga. He can reach enlightenment 
in three years. 

Although the Siva Samhita and the Hatha Yoga Pradipika mention the 
period of time within which success might be achieved, Patanjali 
nowhere lays down the time required to unite the individual soul with 
the Divine Universal Soul. According to him abhyasa (constant and 
determined practice) and vairagya (freedom from desires) make the 
mind calm and franquil. He defines abhyasa as effort of long duration, 
without interruption, performed with devotion, which creates a firm 
foundation. 

The study of Yoga is not like work for a diploma or a university degree 
by someone desiring favourable results in a stipulated time. 

The obstacles, trials and tribulations in the path of Yoga can be 
removed to a large extent with the help of a Guru. (The syllable gu 
means darkness and ru means light. He alone is a Guru who removes 
darkness and brings enlightenment.) The conception of a Guru is deep 
and significant. He is not an ordinary guide. He is a spiritual teacher 
who teaches a way of life, and not merely how to earn a livelihood. He 
transmits knowledge of the Spirit and one who receives such knowledge 
is a sisya, a disciple. 

The relationship between a Guru and a sisya is a very special one, 
transcending that between parent and child, husband and wife or 
friends. A Guru is free from egotism. He devotedly leads his sisya 
towards the ultimate goal without any attraction for fame or gain. 
He shows the path of God and watches the progress of his disciple, guid- 
ing him along that path. He inspires confidence, devotion, discipline, 
deep understanding and illumination through love. With faith in his 
pupil, the Guru strains hard to see that he absorbs the teaching. He en- 
courages him to ask questions and to know the truth by question and 
analysis. 


A sisya should possess the necessary qualifications of higher realiz- 
ation and development. He must have confidence, devotion and love 
for his Guru. The perfect examples of the relationship between a Guru 
and a sisya are those of Yama (the God of Death) and Nachiketa in the 
Kathopanisad and of Sri Krishna and Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. 
Nachiketa and Arjuna obtained enlightenment through their one- 
pointed mind, their eagerness and questioning spirit. The sisya should 
hunger for knowledge and have the spirit of humility, perseverance and 
tenacity of purpose. He should not go to the Guru merely out of curi- 
osity. He should possess sraddha (dynamic faith) and should not be 
discouraged if he cannot reach the goal in the time he had expected. It 
requires tremendous patience to calm the restless mind which is 
coloured by innumerable past experiences and samskara (the accumu- 
lated residue of past thoughts and actions). 

Merely listening to the words of the Guru does not enable the sisya 
to absorb the teaching. This is borne out by the story of Indra and 
Virochana. Indra, the king of Gods, and Virochana, a demon prince, 
went together to their spiritual preceptor Brahma to obtain knowledge 
of the Supreme Self. Both stayed and listened to the same words of 
their Guru. Indra obtained enlightenment, whereas Virochana did not. 
Indra's memory was developed by his devotion to the subject taught 
by the love and faith which he had for his teacher. He had a feeling of 
oneness with his Guru. These were the reasons for his success. Viroch- 
ana's memory was developed only through his intellect. He had no 
devotion either for the subject taught or for his preceptor. He remained 
what he originally was, an intellectual giant. He returned a doubter. 
Indra had intellectual humility, while Virochana had intellectual pride 
and imagined that it was condescending on his part to go to Brahma. The 
approach of Indra was devotional while that of Virochana was practical. 
Virochana was motivated by curiosity and wanted the practical know- 
ledge which he believed would be useful to him later to win power. 

The sisya should above all treasure love, moderation and humility. 
Love begets courage, moderation creates abundance and humility gener- 
ates power. Courage without love is brutish. Abundance without mod- 
eration leads to over-indulgence and decay. Power without humility 
breeds arrogance and tyranny. The true sisya learns from his Guru about 
a power which will never leave him as he returns to the Primeval One, 
the Source of His Being. 


Sadhana (A Key to Freedom) 

All the important texts on Yoga lay great emphasis on sadhana or abhy- 
asa (constant practice). Sadhana is not just a theoretical study of Yoga 


12 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


texts. It is a spiritual endeavour. Oil seeds must be pressed to yield oil. 
Wood must be heated to ignite and bring out the hidden fire within. In 
the same way, the sadhaka must by constant practice light the divine 
flame within himself. 

The young, the old, the extremely aged, even the sick and the 
infirm obtain perfection in Yoga by constant practice. Success will 
follow him who practises, not him who practises not. Success in 
Yoga is not obtained by the mere theoretical reading of sacred 
texts. Success is not obtained by wearing the dress of a yogi or a 
sanyasi (a recluse), nor by talking about it. Constant practice alone 
is the secret of success. Verily, there is no doubt of this/ 

Hatha Yoga Pradipika , chapter 1, verses 64-6. 

'As by learning the alphabet one can, through practice, master all 
the sciences, so by thoroughly practising first physical training one 
acquires the knowledge of Truth (Tattva Jnana), that is the real 
nature of the human soul as being identical with the Supreme 
Spirit pervading the Universe/ 

Gheranda Samhita , chapter 1, verse 5. 

It is by the co-ordinated and concentrated efforts of his body, senses, 
mind, reason and Self that a man obtains the prize of inner peace and 
fulfils the quest of his soul to meet his Maker. The supreme adventure 
in a man's life is his journey back to his Creator. To reach the goal he 
needs well developed and co-ordinated functioning of his body, senses, 
mind, reason and Self. If the effort is not co-ordinated, he fails in his 
adventure. In the third valli (chapter) of the first part of the Kathopanisad , 
Yama (the God of Death) explains this Yoga to the seeker Nachiketa by 
way of the parable of the individual in a chariot. 

'Know the Atman (Self) as the Lord in a chariot, reason as the 
charioteer and mind as the reins. The senses, they say, are the 
horses, and their objects of desire are the pastures. The Self, vvhen 
united with the senses and the mind, the wise call the Enjoyer 
(Bhoktr). The undiscriminating can never rein in his mind; his 
senses are like the vicious horses of a charioteer. The discriminat- 
ing ever controls his mind; his senses are like disciplined horses. 
The undiscriminating becomes unmindful, ever impure; he does 
not reach the goal, wandering from one body to another. The 
discriminating becomes mindful, ever pure; he reaches the goal 
and is never reborn. The man who has a discriminating charioteer 
to rein in his mind reaches the end of the journey - the Supreme 
Abode of the everlasting Spirit. 

'The senses are more powerful than the objects of desire. Greater 
than the senses is the mind, higher than the mind is the reason 


What is Yoga? 13 


and superior to reason is He - the Spirit in all. Discipline yourself 
by the Self and destroy your deceptive enemy in the shape of 
desire/ 

Bhagavad Gxtd, chapter III, verses 42-3. 

To realize this not only constant practice is demanded but also renunci- 
ation. As regards renunciation, the question arises as to what one should 
renounce. The yogi does not renounce the world, for that would mean 
renouncing the Creator. The yogi renounces all that takes him away 
from the Lord. He renounces his own desires, knowing that all 
inspiration and right action come from the Lord. He renounces those 
who oppose the work of the Lord, those who spread demonic ideas and 
who merely talk of moral values but do not practise them. 

The yogi does not renounce action. He cuts the bonds that tie himself 
to his actions by dedicating their fruits either to the Lord or to humanity. 
He believes that it is his privilege to do his duty and that he has no 
right to the fruits of his actions. 

While others are asleep when duty calls and wake up only to claim 
their rights, the yogi is fully awake to his duty, but asleep over his 
rights. Hence it is said that in the night of all beings the disciplined and 
tranquil man wakes to the light. 


Astahga Yoga - The Eight Limbs of Yoga 

The Yoga Sutra of Patanjali is divided into four chapters or pada. The 
first deals with samadhi, the second with the means (sadhana) to achieve 
Yoga, the third enumerates the powers (vibhuti) that the yogi comes 
across in his quest, and the fourth deals with absolution (kaivalya). 


Yama 

The eight limbs of Yoga are described in the second chapter. The first 
of these is yama (ethical disciplines) - the great commandments trans- 
cending creed, country, age and time. They are: ahimsa (non-violence), 
satya (truth), asteya (non-stealing), brahmacharya (continence) and apa- 
rigraha (non-coveting). These commandments are the rules of morality 
for society and the individual, which if not obeyed bring chaos, violence, 
untruth, stealing, dissipation and covetousness. The roots of these evils 
are the emotions of greed, desire and attachment, which may be mild, 
medium or excessive. They only bring pain and ignorance. Patanjali 
strikes at the root of these evils by changing the direction of one's 
thinking along the five principles of yama. 


14 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

1. Ahimsa. The word ahimsa is made up of the particle 'a' meaning 'not' 
and the noun himsa meaning killing or violence. It is more than a nega- 
tive command not to kill, for it has a wider positive meaning, love. This 
love embraces all creation for we are all children of the same Father - 
the Lord. The yogi believes that to kill or to destroy a thing or being is 
to insult its Creator. Men either kill for food or to protect themselves 
from danger. But merely because a man is a vegetarian, it does not 
necessarily follow that he is non-violent by temperament or that he is 
a yogi, though a vegetarian diet is a necessity for the practice of yoga. 
Bloodthirsty tyrants may be vegetarians, but violence is a state of mind, 
not of diet. It resides in a man's mind and not in the instrument he 
holds in his hand. One can use a knife to pare fruit or to stab an enemy. 
The fault is not in the instrument, but in the user. 

Men take to violence to protect their own interests - their own bodies, 
their loved ones, their property or dignity. But a man cannot rely upon 
himself alone to protect himself or others. The belief that he can do so 
is wrong. A man must rely upon God, who is the source of all strength. 
Then he will fear no evil. 

Violence arises out of fear, weakness, ignorance or restlessness. To 
curb it what is most needed is freedom from fear. To gain this freedom, 
what is required is a change of outlook on life and reorientation of 
the mind. Violence is bound to decline when men learn to base their 
faith upon reality and investigation rather than upon ignorance and 
supposition. 

The yogi believes that every creature has as much right to live as he 
has. He believes that he is born to help others and he looks upon creation 
with eyes of love. He knows that his life is linked inextricably with that 
of others and he rejoices if he can help them to be happy. He puts the 
happiness of others before his own and becomes a source of joy to all 
who meet him. As parents encourage a baby to walk the first steps, he 
encourages those more unfortunate than himself and makes them fit 
for survival. 

For a wrong done by others, men demand justice; while for that done 
by themselves they plead mercy and forgiveness. The yogi on the other 
hand, believes that for a wrong done by himself, there should be justice, 
while for that done by another there should be forgiveness. He knows 
and teaches others how to live. Always striving to perfect himself, he 
shows them by his love and compassion how to improve themselves. 

The yogi opposes the evil in the wrofig-doer, but not the wrong-doer. 
He prescribes penance not punishment for a wrong done. Opposition 
to evil and love for the wrong-doer can live side by side. A drunkard's 
wife whilst loving him may still oppose his habit. Opposition without 
love leads to violence; loving the wrong-doer without opposing the evil 
in him is folly and leads to misery. The yogi knows that to love a person 



What is Yoga? 15 

whilst fighting the evil in him is the right course to follow. The battle 
is won because he fights it with love. A loving mother will sometimes 
beat her child to cure it of a bad habit; in the same way a true follower 
of ahimsa loves his opponent. 

Along with ahimsa go abhaya (freedom from fear) and akrodha (free- 
dom from anger). Freedom from fear comes only to those who lead a 
pure life. The yogi fears none and none need fear him, because he is 
purified by the study of the Self. Fear grips a man and paralyses him. 

He is afraid of the future, the unknown and the unseen. He is afraid 
that he may lose his means of livelihood, wealth or reputation. But the 
greatest fear is that of death. The yogi knows that he is different from 
his body, which is a temporary house for his spirit. He sees all beings 
in the Self and the Self in all beings and therefore he loses all fear. 

Though the body is subject to sickness, age, decay and death, the spirit 
remains unaffected. To the yogi death is the sauce that adds zest to life. 

He has dedicated his mind, his reason and his whole life to the Lord. 

When he has linked his entire being to the Lord, what shall he then 
fear? 

There are two types of anger (krodha), one of which debases the mind 
while the other leads to spiritual growth. The root of the first is pride, 
which makes one angry when slighted. This prevents the mind from 
seeing things in perspective and makes one's judgement defective. The 
yogi, on the other hand, is angry with himself when his mind stoops 
low or when all his learning and experience fail to stop him from folly. 

He is stern with himself when he deals with his own faults, but gentle 
with the faults of others. Gentleness of mind is an attribute of a yogi, 
whose heart melts at all suffering. In him gentleness for others and 
firmness for himself go hand in hand, and in his presence all hostilities 
are given up. 

2. Satya. Satya or truth is the highest rule of conduct or morality. Mah- 
atma Gandhi said: 'Truth is God and God is Truth. As fire burns 
impurities and refines gold, so the fire of truth cleanses the yogi and 
burns up the dross in him. 

If the mind thinks thoughts of truth, if the tongue speaks words of 
truth and if the whole life is based upon truth, then one becomes fit for 
union with the Infinite. Reality in its fundamental nature is love and 
truth and expresses itself through these two aspects. The yogi's life 
must conform strictly to these two facets of Reality. That is why ahimsa, 
which is essentially based on love, is enjoined. Satya presupposes per- 
fect truthfulness in thought, word and deed. Untruthfulness in any form 
puts the sadhaka out of harmony with the fundamental law of truth. 

Truth is not limited to speech alone. There are four sins of speech: 
abuse and obscenity, dealing in falsehoods, calumny or telling tales and 

L 



16 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

lastly ridiculing what others hold to be sacred. The tale bearer is more 
poisonous than a snake. The control of speech leads to the rooting out 
of malice. When the mind bears malice towards none, it is filled with 
charity towards all. He who has learnt to control his tongue has attained 
self-control in a great measure. When such a person speaks he will be 
heard with respect and attention. His words will be remembered, for 
they will be good and true. 

When one who is established in truth prays with a pure heart, then 
things he really needs come to him when they are really needed: he 
does not have to run after them. The man firmly established in truth 
gets the fruit of his actions without apparently doing anything. God, 
the source of all truth, supplies his needs and looks after his welfare. 

3. Asteya. The desire to possess and enjoy what another has, drives a 
person to do evil deeds. From this desire spring the urge to steal and 
the urge to covet. Asteya (a = not, steya = stealing), or non-stealing 
includes not only taking what belongs to another without permission, 
but also using something for a different purpose to that intended, or 
beyond the time permitted by its owner. It thus includes misappropri- 
ation, breach of trust, mismanagement and misuse. The yogi reduces 
his physical needs to the minimum, believing that if he gathers things 
he does not really need, he is a thief. While other men crave for wealth, 
power, fame or enjoyment, the yogi has one craving and that is to 
adore the Lord. Freedom from craving enables one to ward off great 
temptations. Craving muddies the stream of tranquillity. It makes men 
base and vile and cripples them. He who obeys the commandment Thou 
shalt not steal , becomes a trusted repository of all treasures. 

4. Brahmacharya. According to the dictionary brahmacharya means the 
life of celibacy, religious study and self-restraint. It is thought that the 
loss of semen leads to death and its retention to life. By Lhe preservation 
of semen the yogi's body develops a sweet smell. So long as it is 
retained, there is no fear of death. Hence the injunction that it should 
be preserved by concentrated effort of the mind. The concept of brahma- 
charya is not one of negation, forced austerity and prohibition. Accord- 
ing to Sankaracharya, a brahmachari (one who observes brahmacharya) 
is a man who is engrossed in the study of the sacred Vedic lore, con- 
stantly moves in Brahman and knows that all exists in Brahman. In 
other words, one who sees divinity in all is a brahmachari. Patarijali, 
however, lays stress on continence of the body, speech and mind. This 
does not mean that the philosophy of Yoga is meant only for celibates. 
Brahmacharya has little to do with whether one is a bachelor or married 
and living the life of a householder. One has to develop the higher 
aspects of Brahmacharya in one's daily living. It is not necessary for 



What is Yoga? 17 


one's salvation to stay unmarried and without a house. On the contrary, 
all the smrtls (codes of law) recommend marriage. Without experiencing 
human love and happiness, it is not possible to know divine love. 
Almost all the yogis and sages of old in India were married men with 
families of their own. They did not shirk their social or moral responsi- 
bilities. Marriage and parenthood are no bar to the knowledge of divine 
love, happiness and union with the Supreme Soul. 

Dealing with the position of an aspirant who is a householder, the 
Siva Samhita says: Let him practise free from the company of men in a 
retired place. For the sake of appearances, he should remain in society, 
but not have his heart in it. He should not renounce the duties of his 
profession, caste or rank; but let him perform these as an instrument of 
the Lord, without any thought of the results. He succeeds by following 
wisely the method of Yoga; there is no doubt of it. Remaining in the 
midst of the family, always doing the duties of the householder, he who 
is free from merits and demerits -and has restrained his senses, attains 
salvation. The householder practising Yoga is not touched by virtue or 
vice: if to protect mankind he commits any sin, he is not polluted by it. 
(Chapter V, verses 234-8.) 

When one is established in brahmacharya, one develops a fund of 
vitality and energy, a courageous mind and a powerful intellect so that 
one can fight any type of injustice. The brahmacharl will use the forces 
he generates wisely: he will utilize the physical ones for doing the work 
of the Lord, the mental for the spread of culture and the intellectual for 
the growth of spiritual life. Brahmacharya is the battery that sparks the 
torch of wisdom. 

5. Aparigraha. Parigraha means hoarding or collecting. To be free from 
hoarding is aparigraha. It is thus but another facet of asteya (non- 
stealing). Just as one should not take things one does not really need, so 
one should not hoard or collect things one does not require immediately. 
Neither should one take anything without working for it or as a favour 
from another, for this indicates poverty of spirit. The yogi feels that the 
collection or hoarding of things implies a lack of faith in God and in 
himself to provide for his future. He keeps faith by keeping before him 
the image of the moon. During the dark half of the month, the moon 
rises late when most men are asleep and so do not appreciate its beauty. 
Its splendour wanes but it does not stray from its path and is indifferent 
to man's lack of appreciation. It has faith that it will be full again when 
it faces the Sun and then men will eagerly await its glorious rising. 

By the observance of aparigraha, the yogi makes his life as simple as 
possible and trains his mind not to feel the loss or the lack of anything. 
Then everything he really needs will come to him by itself at the proper 
time. The life of an ordinary man is filled with an unending series of 

L 



18 


The 


Illustrated Light on Yoga 


disturbances and frustrations and with his reactions to them. Thus there 
is hardly any possibility of keeping the mind in a state of equilibrium. 
The sadhaka has developed the capacity to remain satisfied with what- 
ever happens to him. Thus he obtains the peace which takes him beyond 
the realms of illusion and misery with which our world is saturated. He 
recalls the promise given by Sri Krishna to Arjuna in the ninth chapter of 
the Bhagavad Gita : To those who worship Me alone with single-minded 
devotion, who are in harmony with Me every moment, I bring full 
security. I shall supply all their wants and shall protect them for ever.' 


Niyama 

Niyama are the rules of conduct that apply to individual discipline, 
while yama are universal in their application. The five niyama listed by 
Patanjali are: saucha (purity), santosa (contentment), tapas (ardour or 
austerity), svadhyaya (study of the Self) and Isvara pranidhana (dedi- 
cation to the Lord). 

1. Saucha . Purity of blood is essential for well-being. While good habits 
like bathing purify the body externally, asana and praayama cleanse it 
internally. The practice of asanas tones the entire body and removes the 
toxins and impurities caused by over-indulgence. Pranayama cleanses 
and aerates the lungs, oxygenates the blood and purifies the nerves. 
But more important than the physical cleansing of the body is the cleans- 
ing of the mind of its disturbing emotions like hatred, passion, anger, 
lust, greed, delusion and pride. Still more important is the cleansing of 
the intellect (buddhi) of impure thoughts. The impurities of the mind 
are washed off in the waters of bhakti (adoration). The impurities of the 
intellect or reason are burned off in the fire of svadhyaya (study of the 
Self). This internal cleansing gives radiance and joy. It brings benevol- 
ence (saumanasya) and banishes mental pain, dejection, sorrow and 
despair (daurmanasya). When one is benevolent, one sees the virtues 
in others and not merely their faults. The respect which one shows for 
another's virtues, makes him self-respecting as well and helps him to 
fight his own sorrows and difficulties. When the mind is lucid, it is 
easy to make it one-pointed (ekagra). With concentration, one obtains 
mastery over the senses (indriyajaya). Then one is ready to enter the 
temple of his own body and see his real self in the mirror of his mind. 

Besides purity of body, thought and word, pure food is also necessary. 
Apart from cleanliness in the preparation of food it is also necessary to 
observe purity in the means by which one procures it. 

Food, the supporting yet consuming substance of all life, is regarded 
as a phase of Brahman. It should be eaten with the feeling that with 


What is Yoga? 19 


each morsel one can gain strength to serve the Lord. Then food becomes 
pure. Whether or not to be a vegetarian is a purely personal matter as 
each person is influenced by the tradition and habits of the country in 
which he was born and bred. But, in course of time, the practitioner of 
yoga has to adopt a vegetarian diet, in order to attain one-pointed atten- 
tion and spiritual evolution. 

Food should be taken to promote health, strength, energy and life. It 
should be simple, nourishing, juicy and soothing. Avoid foods which 
are sour, bitter, pungent, burning, stale, tasteless, heavy and unclean. 

Character is moulded by the type of food we take and by how we eat 
it. Men are the only creatures that eat when not hungry and generally 
live to eat rather than eat to live. If we eat for flavours of the tongue, 
we over-eat and so suffer from digestive disorders which throw our 
systems out of gear. The yogi believes in harmony, so he eats for the 
sake of sustenance only. He does not eat too much or too little. He looks 
upon his body as the rest-house of his spirit and guards himself against 
over-indulgence . 

Besides food, the place is also important for spiritual practices. It is 
difficult to practise in a distant country (away from home), in a forest, 
in a crowded city, or where it is noisy. One should choose a place where 
food is easily procurable, a place which is free from insects, protected 
from the elements and with pleasing surroundings. The banks of a lake 
or river or the sea-shore are ideal. Such quiet ideal places are hard to 
find in modern times; but one can at least make a corner in one's room 
available for practice and keep it clean, airy, dry and pest-free. 

2. Santosa. Santosa or contentment has to be cultivated. A mind that is 
not content cannot concentrate. The yogi feels the lack of nothing and 
so he is naturally content. Contentment gives bliss unsurpassed to the 
yogi. A contented man is complete for he has known the love of the 
Lord and has done his duty. He is blessed for he has known truth 
and joy. 

Contentment and tranquillity are states of mind. Differences arise 
among men because of race, creed, wealth and learning. Differences 
create discord and there arise conscious or unconscious conflicts which 
distract and perplex one. Then the mind cannot become one-pointed 
(ekagra) and is robbed of its peace. There is contentment and tranquillity 
when the flame of the spirit does not waver in the wind of desire. The 
sadhaka does not seek the empty peace of the dead, but the peace of 
one whose reason is firmly established in God. 

3. Tayas. Tapas is derived from the root 'tap' meaning to blaze, burn, 
shine, suffer pain or consume by heat. It therefore means a burning 
effort under all circumstances to achieve a definite goal in life. It involves 


20 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

purification, self-discipline and austerity. The whole science of character 
building may be regarded as a practice of tapas. 

Tapas is the conscious effort to achieve ultimate union with the Divine 
and to bum up all desires which stand in the way of this goal. A worthy 
aim makes life illumined, pure and divine. Without such an aim, action 
and prayer have no value. Life without tapas, is like a heart without 
love. Without tapas, the mind cannot reach up to the Lord. 

Tapas is of three types. It may relate to the body (kayika), to speech 
(vachika) or to mind (manasika). Continence (brahmacharya) and non- 
violence (ahimsa) are tapas of the body. Using words which do not 
offend, reciting the glory of God, speaking the truth without regard for 
the consequences to oneself and not speaking ill of others are tapas of 
speech. Developing a mental attitude whereby one remains tranquil and 
balanced in joy and sorrow and retains self-control are tapas of the 
mind. 

It is tapas when one works without any selfish motive or hope of 
reward and with an unshakable faith that not even a blade of grass can 
move without His will. 

By tapas the yogi develops strength in body, mind and character. 
He gains courage and wisdom, integrity, straightforwardness and 
simplicity. 

4. Svadhyaya. Sva means self and adhyaya means study or education. 
Education is the drawing out of the best that is within a person. 
Svadhyaya, therefore, is the education of the self. 

Svadhyaya is different from mere instruction like attending a lecture 
where the lecturer parades his own learning before the ignorance of his 
audience. When people meet for svadhyaya, the speaker and listener 
are of one mind and have mutual love and respect. There is no sermoniz- 
ing and one heart speaks to another. The ennobling thoughts that arise 
from svadhyaya are, so to speak, taken into one's bloodstream so that 
they become a part of one's life and being. 

The person practising svadhyaya reads his own book of life, at the 
same time that he writes and revises it. There is a change in his outlook 
on life. He starts to realize that all creation is meant for bhakti (adoration) 
rather than for bhoga (enjoyment), that all creation is divine, that there 
is divinity within himself and that the energy which moves him is the 
same that moves the entire universe. 

According to 6ri Vinoba Bhave (the leader of the Bhoodan movement), 
svadhyaya is the study of one subject which is the basis or root of all 
other subjects or actions, upon which the others rest, but which itself 
does not rest upon anything. 

To make life healthy, happy and peaceful, it is essential to study 
regularly divine literature in a pure place. This study of the sacred books 
of the world will enable the sadhaka to concentrate upon and solve the 


What 

difficult problems of life when they arise. It will put an end to ignorance 
and bring knowledge. Ignorance has no beginning, but it has an end. 
There is a beginning but no end to knowledge. By svadhyaya the sad- 
haka understands the nature of his soul and gains communion with the 
divine. The sacred books of the world are for all to read. They are not 
meant for the members of one particular faith alone. As bees savour the 
nectar in various flowers, so the sadhaka absorbs things in other faiths 
which will enable him to appreciate his own faith better. 

Philology is not a language but the science of languages, the study of 
which will enable the student to learn his own language better. Simi- 
larly, Yoga is not a religion by itself. It is the science of religions, the 
study of which will enable a sadhaka the better to appreciate his own 
faith. 

5. Isvara pranidhana. Dedication to the Lord of one's actions and will is 
Igvara pranidhana. He who has faith in God does not despair. He has 
illumination (tejas). He who knows that all creation belongs to the Lord 
will not be puffed up with pride or drunk with power. He will not stoop 
for selfish purposes; his head will bow only in worship. When the waters 
of bhakti (adoration) are made to flow through the turbines of the mind, 
the result is mental power and spiritual illumination. While mere physi- 
cal strength without bhakti is lethal, mere adoration without strength 
of character is like an opiate. Addiction to pleasures destroys both power 
and glory. From the gratification of the senses as they run after pleasures 
arise mo ha (attachment) and lobha (greed) for their repetition. If the 
senses are not gratified, then, there is soka (sorrow). They have to be 
curbed with knowledge and forbearance; but to control the mind is more 
difficult. After one has exhausted one's own resources and still not 
succeeded, one turns to the Lord for help for He is the source of all 
power. It is at this stage that bhakti begins. In bhakti, the mind, the 
intellect and the will are surrendered to the Lord and the sadhaka prays: 

'I do not know what is good for me. Thy will be done.' Others pray to 
have their own desires gratified or accomplished. In bhakti or true love 
there is no place for T and 'mine'. When the feeling of T and 'mine' 
disappears, the individual soul has reached full growth. 

When the mind has been emptied of desires of personal gratification, 
it should be filled with thoughts of the Lord. In a mind filled with 
thoughts of personal gratification, there is danger of the senses dragging 
the mind after the objects of desire. Attempts to practise bhakti without 
emptying the mind of desires is like building a fire with' wet fuel. It 
makes a lot of smoke and brings tears to the eyes of the person who 
builds it and of those around him. A mind with desires does not ignite 
and glow, nor does it generate light and warmth when touched with 
the fire of knowledge. 

The name of the Lord is like the Sun, dispelling all darkness. The 


is Yoga? 21 


22 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


l 


moon is full when it faces the sun. The individual soul experiences 
fullness (purnata) when it faces the Lord. If the shadow of the earth 
comes between the full moon and the sun there is an eclipse. If the 
feeling of T and "mine" casts its shadow upon the experience of fullness, 
all efforts of the sadhaka to gain peace are futile. 

Actions mirror a man's personality better than his words. The yogi 
has learnt the art of dedicating all his actions to the Lord and so they 
reflect the divinity within him. 


Asana 

The third limb of yoga is asana or posture. Asana brings steadiness, 
health and lightness of limb. A steady and pleasant posture produces 
mental equilibrium and prevents fickleness of mind. Asanas are not 
merely gymnastic exercises; they are postures. To perform them one 
needs a clean airy place, a blanket and determination, while for other 
systems of physical training one needs large playing fields and costly 
equipment. Asanas can be done alone, as the limbs of the body provide 
the necessary weights and counter- weights. By practising them one 
develops agility, balance, endurance and great vitality. 

Asanas have been evolved over the centuries so as to exercise every 
muscle, nerve and gland in the body. They secure a fine physique, 
which is strong and elastic without being muscle-bound and they keep 
the body free from disease. They reduce fatigue and soothe the nerves. 
But their real importance lies in the way they train and discipline the 
mind. 

Many actors, acrobats, athletes, dancers, musicians and sportsmen 
also possess superb physiques and have great control over the body, 
but they lack control over the mind, the intellect and the Self. Hence 
they are in disharmony with themselves and one rarely comes across a 
balanced personality among them. They often put the body above all 
else. Though the yogi does not underrate his body, he does not think 
merely of its perfection but of his senses, mind, intellect and soul. 

The yogi conquers the body by the practice of asanas and makes it a 
fit vehicle for the spirit. He knows that it is a necessary vehicle for the 
spirit. A soul without a body is like a bird deprived of its power to fly. 

The yogi does not fear death, for time must take its toll of all flesh. He 
knows that the body is constantly changing and is affected by childhood, 
youth and old age. Birth and death are natural phenomena but the soul 
is not subject to birth and death. As a man casting off worn-out garments 
takes on new ones, so the dweller within the body casting aside worn- 
out bodies enters into others that are new. 

The yogi believes that his body has been given to him by the Lord 


l 

I 

i 

\ 

\ 

l 

> 

I 

l 

\ 

s 

i 

f 


What is Yoga? 23 



not for enjoyment alone, but also for the service of his fellow men during 
every wakeful moment of his life. He does not consider it his property. 
He knows that the Lord who has given him his body will one day take 
it away. 

By performing asanas, the sadhaka first gains health, which is not 
mere existence. It is not a commodity which can be purchased with 
money. It is an asset to be gained by sheer hard work. It is a state of 
complete equilibrium of body, mind and spirit. Forgetfulness of physical 
and mental consciousness is health. The yogi frees himself from physical 
disabilities and mental distractions by practising asanas. He surrenders 
his actions and their fruits to the Lord in the service of the world. 

The yogi realizes that his life and all its activities are part of the divine 
action in nature, manifesting and operating in the form of man. In the 
beating of his pulse and the rhythm of his respiration, he recognizes 
the flow of the seasons and the throbbing of universal life. His body is 
a temple which houses the Divine Spark. He feels that to neglect or to 
deny the needs of the body and to think of it as something not divine, 
is to neglect and deny the universal life of which it is a part. The needs 
of the body are the needs of the divine spirit which lives through the 
body. The yogi does not look heaven-ward to find God for he knows 
that He is within, being known as the Antaratma (the Inner Self). He 
feels the kingdom of God within and without and finds that heaven lies 
in himself. 

Where does the body end and the mind begin? Where does the mind 
end and the spirit begin? They cannot be divided as they are inter-related 
and but different aspects of the same all-pervading divine con- 
sciousness. 

The yogi never neglects or mortifies the body or the mind, but cher- 
ishes both. To him the body is not an impediment to his spiritual libera- 
tion nor is it the cause of its fall, but is an instrument of attainment. He 
seeks a body strong as a thunderbolt, healthy and free from suffering 
so as to dedicate it in the service of the Lord for which it is intended. 
As pointed out in the Mundakopanisad the Self cannot be attained by one 
without strength, nor through heedlessness, nor without an aim. Just 
as an unbaked earthen pot dissolves in water the body soon decays. So 
bake it hard in the fire of yogic discipline in order to strength and 
purify it. 

The names of the asanas are significant and illustrate the principle of 
evolution. Some are named after vegetation like the tree (vrksa) and the 
lotus (padma); some after insects like the locust (salabha) and the scor- 
pion (vrSchika); some after aquatic animals and amphibians like the 
fish (matsya), the tortoise (kurma), the frog (bheka or manduka) or 
the crocodile (nakra). There are asanas called after birds like the cock 
(kukkuta), the heron (baka), the peacock (mayura) and the swan 


24 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

(hamsa). They are also named after quadrupeds like the dog (svana), 
the horse (vatayana), the camel (ustra) and the lion (simha). Creatures 
that crawl like the serpent (bhujahga) are not forgotten, nor is the human 
embryonic state (garbha-pinda) overlooked. Asanas are named after 
legendary heroes like Virabhadra and Hanuman, son of the Wind. Sages 
like Bharadvaja, Kapila, Vasistha and Visvamitra are remembered by 
having asanas named after them. Some asanas are also called after gods 
of the Hindu pantheon and some recall the Avataras, or incarnations of 
Divine Power. Whilst performing asanas the yogi's body assumes many 
forms resembling a variety of creatures. His mind is trained not to 
despise any creature, for he knows that throughout the whole gamut 
of creation, from the lowliest insect to the most perfect sage, there 
breathes the same Universal Spirit, which assumes innumerable forms. 
He knows that the highest form is that of the Formless. He finds unity 
in universality. True asana is that in which the thought of Brahman 
flows effortlessly and incessantly through the mind of the sadhaka. 

Dualities like gain and loss, victory and defeat, fame and shame, body 
and mind, mind and soul vanish through mastery of the asanas, and 
the sadhaka then passes on to pranayama, the fourth stage in the path of 
yoga. In pranayama practices the nostrils, nasal passages and mem- 
branes, the windpipe, the lungs and the diaphragm are the only parts 
of the body which are actively involved. These alone feel the full impact 
of the force of prana, the breath of life. Therefore, do not seek to master 
pranayama in a hurry, as you are playing with life itself. By its improper 
practice respiratory diseases will arise and the nervous system will be 
shattered. By its proper practice one is freed from most diseases. Never 
attempt to practice pranayama alone by yourself. For it is essential to 
have the personal supervision of a Guru who knows the physical limita- 
tions of his pupil. 

Pranayama 

Just as the word yoga is one of wide import, so also is prana. Prana 
means breath, respiration, life, vitality, wind, energy or strength. It also 
connotes the soul as opposed to the body. The word is generally used 
in the plural to indicate vital breaths. Ayama means length, expansion,, 
stretching or restraint. Pranayama thus connotes extension of breath and 
its control. This control is over all the functions of breathing, namely, 

(1) inhalation or inspiration, which is termed puraka (filling up); 

(2) exhalation or expiration, which is called rechaka (emptying the 
lungs), and (3) retention or holding the breath, a state where there is 
no inhalation or exhalation, which is termed kumbhaka. In Hatha Yoga 
texts kumbhaka is also used in a loose generic sense to include all the 
three respiratory processes of inhalation, exhalation and retention. 


What is Yoga? 


25 


A kumbha is a pitcher, water pot, jar or chalice. A water pot may be 
emptied of all air and filled completely with water, or it may be emptied 
of all water and filled completely with air. Similarly, there are two states 
of kumbhaka namely (1) when breathing is suspended after full 
inhalation (the lungs being completely filled with life-giving air), and 
(2) when breathing is suspended after full exhalation (the lungs being 
emptied of all noxious air). The first of these states, where breath is 
held after a full inhalation, but before exhalation begins, is known as 
antara kumbhaka. The second, where breath is held after a full exha- 
lation, but before inhalation begins is known as bahya kumbhaka. 
Antara means inner or interior, while bahya means outer or exterior. 
Thus, kumbhaka is the interval or intermediate time between full inha- 
lation and exhalation (antara kumbhaka) or between full exhalation and 
inhalation (bahya kumbhaka). In both these types breathing is sus- 
pended and restrained. 

Pranayama is thus the science of breath. It is the hub round which 
the wheel of life revolves. 'As lions, elephants and tigers are tamed very 
slowly and cautiously, so should prana be brought under control very 
slowly in gradation measured according to one's capacity and physical 
limitations. Otherwise it will kill the practitioner,' warns the Hatha Yoga 
Pradtpika (chapter II, verse 16). 

The yogi's life is not measured by the number of his days but by the 
number of his breaths. Therefore, he follows the proper rhythmic pat- 
terns of slow deep breathing. These rhythmic patterns strengthen the 
respiratory system, soothe the nervous system and reduce craving. As 
desires and cravings diminish, the mind is set free and becomes a fit 
vehicle for concentration. By improper practice of pranayama the pupil 
introduces several disorders into his system like hiccough, wind, 
asthma, cough, catarrh, pains in the head, eyes and ears and nervous 
irritation. It takes a long time to learn slow, deep, steady and proper 
inhalations and exhalations. Master this before attempting kumbhaka. 

As a fire blazes brightly when the covering of ash over it is scattered 
by the wind, the divine fire within the body shines in all its majesty 
when the ashes of desire are scattered by the practice of pranayama. 

The emptying the mind of the whole of its illusion is the true rechaka 
(exhalation). The realization that "I am Atma (spirit)" is the true puraka 
(inhalation). And the steady sustenance of the mind on this conviction 
is the true kumbhaka (retention). This is true pranayama,' says §ankara- 
charya. 

Every living creature unconsciously breathes the prayer 'So'ham' 
(Sah = He: Aham = Aham = I-He, the Immortal Spirit, am I) with 
each inward breath. So also with each outgoing breath each creature 
prays 'Hamsah' (I am He). This ajapa-mantra (unconscious repetitive 
prayer) goes on for ever within each living creature throughout life. The 


26 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


yogi fully realizes the significance of this ajapa-mantra and so is released 
from all the fetters that bind his soul. He offers up the very breath of 
his being to the Lord as sacrifice and receives the breath of life from the 
Lord as his blessing. 

Prana in the body of the individual (jlvatma) is part of the cosmic 
breath of the Universal Spirit (Paramatma). An attempt is made to 
harmonize the individual breath (pindaprana) with the cosmic breath 
(Brahmanda-prana) through the practice of pranayama. 

It has been said by Kariba Ekken, a seventeenth-century mystic: If 
you would foster a calm spirit, first regulate your breathing; for when 
that is under control, the heart will be at peace; but when breathing 
is spasmodic, then it will be troubled. Therefore, before attempting 
anything, first regulate your breathing on which your temper will be 
softened, your spirit calmed.' 

The chitta (mind, reason and ego) is like a chariot yoked to a team of 
powerful horses. One of them is prana (breath), the other is vasana 
(desire). The chariot moves in the direction of the more powerful animal. 
If breath prevails, the desires are controlled, the senses are held in check 
and the mind is stilled. If desire prevails, breath is in disarray and the 
mind is agitated and troubled. Therefore, the yogi masters the science 
of breath and by the regulation and control of breath, he controls the 
mind and stills its constant movement. In the practice of pranayama 
the eyes are kept shut to prevent the mind from wandering. 'When 
the prana and the manas (mind) have been absorbed, an undefinable 
joy ensues/ ( Hatha Yoga Pradipika, chapter IV, verse 30.) 

Emotional excitement affects the rate of breathing; equally, deliberate 
regulation of breathing checks emotional excitement. As the very object 
of Yoga is to control and still the mind, the yogi first learns pranayama 
to master the breath. This will enable him to control the senses and so 
reach the stage of pratyahara. Only then will the mind be ready for 
concentration (dhyana). 

The mind is said to be twofold - pure and impure. It is pure when it 
is completely free from desires and impure when it is in union with 
desires. By making the mind motionless and freeing it from sloth and 
distractions, one reaches the state of mindlessness (amanaska), which 
is the supreme state of samadhi. This state of mindlessness is not lunacy 
or idiocy but the conscious state of the mind when it is free from 
thoughts and desires. There is a vital difference between an idiot or a 
lunatic on the one hand, and a yogi striving to achieve a state of mind- 
lessness on the other. The former is careless; the latter attempts to be 
carefree. It is the oneness of the breath and mind and so also of the 
senses and the abandonment of all conditions of existence and thought 
that is designated Yoga. 


What is Yoga ? 27 


Prana Vayu. One of the most subtle forms of energy is air. This vital 
energy which also pervades the human body is classified in five main 
categories in the Hatha Yoga texts according to the various functions 
performed by the energy. These are termed vayu (wind) and the five 
main divisions are: prana (here the generic term is used to designate 
the particular), which moves in the region of the heart and controls 
respiration; apana, which moves in the sphere of the lower abdomen 
and controls the function of eliminating urine and faeces; samana, which 
stokes the gastric fires to aid digestion; udana, which dwells in the 
thoracic cavity and controls the intake of air and food; and vyana, which 
pervades the entire body and distributes the energy derived from food 
and breath. There are also five subsidiary vayus. These are: naga, which 
relieves abdominal pressure by belching; kurma, which controls the 
movements of the eyelids to prevent foreign matter or too bright a light 
entering the eyes; krkara, which prevents substances passing up the 
nasal passages and down the throat by making one sneeze or cough; 
devadatta, which provides for the intake of extra oxygen in a tired body 
by causing a yawn, and lastly dhanamjaya, which remains in the body 
even after death and sometimes bloats up a corpse. 


Pratydhdra 

If a man's reason succumbs to the pull of his senses he is lost. On the 
other hand; if there is rhythmic control of breath, the senses instead of 
running after external objects of desire turn inwards, and man is set 
free from their tyranny. This is the fifth stage of Yoga, namely, pratyah- 
ara, where the senses are brought under control. 

When this stage is reached, the sadhaka goes through a searching 
self-examination. To overcome the deadly but attractive spell of sensual 
objects, he needs the insulation of adoration (bhakti) by recalling to his 
mind the Creator who made the objects of his desire. He also needs the 
lamp of knowledge of his divine heritage. The mind, in truth, is for 
mankind the cause of bondage and liberation; it brings bondage if it is 
bound to the objects of desire and liberation when it is free from objects. 
There is bondage when the mind craves, grieves or is unhappy over 
something. The mind becomes pure when all desires and fears are 
annihilated. Both the good and the pleasant present themselves to men 
and prompt them to action. The yogi prefers the good to the pleasant. 
Others driven by their desires, prefer the pleasant to the good and miss 
the very purpose of life. The yogi feels joy in what he is. He knows 
how to stop and, therefore, lives in peace. At first he prefers that which 
is bitter as poison, but he perseveres in his practice knowing well that 
in the end it will become as sweet as nectar. Others hankering for the 


28 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

union of their senses with the objects of their desires, prefer that which 
at first seems sweet as nectar, but do not know that in the end it will 
be as bitter as poison. 

The yogi knows that the path towards satisfaction of the senses by 
sensual desires is broad, but that it leads to destruction and that there 
are many who follow it. The path of Yoga is like the sharp edge of a 
razor, narrow and difficult to tread, and there are few who find it. The 
yogi knows that the paths of ruin or of salvation lie within himself. 

According to Hindu philosophy, consciousness manifests in three 
different qualities. For man, his life and his consciousness, together 
with the entire cosmos are the emanations of one and the same prakrti 
(cosmic matter or substance) - emanations that differ in designation 
through the predominance of one of the gunas. The gunas (qualities or 
attributes) are: 

1. Sattva (the illuminating, pure or good quality), which leads to clarity 
and mental serenity. 

2. Rajas (the quality of mobility or activity), which makes a person 
active and energetic, tense and wilful, and 

3. Tamas (the dark and restraining quality), which obstructs and 
counteracts the tendency of rajas to work and of sattva to reveal. 

Tamas is a quality of delusion, obscurity, inertia and ignorance. A 
person in whom it predominates is inert and plunged in a state of torpor. 
The quality of sattva leads towards the divine and tamas towards the 
demonic, while in between these two stands rajas. 

The faith held, the food consumed, the sacrifices performed, the aus- 
terities undergone and the gifts given by each individual vary in accord- 
ance with his predominating guna. 

He that is born with tendencies towards the divine is fearless and 
pure. He is generous and self-controlled. He pursues the study of the 
Self. He is non-violent, truthful and free from anger. He renounces the 
fruits of his labour, working only for the sake of work. He has a tranquil 
mind, with malice towards none and charity towards all, for he is free 
from craving. He is gentle, modest and steady. He is illumined, clement 
and resolute, being free from perfidy and pride. 

A man in whom rajo-guna predominates has inner thirst. As he is 
passionate and covetous, he hurts others. Being full of lust and hatred, 
envy and deceit, his desires are insatiable. He is unsteady, fickle and 
easily distracted as well as ambitious and acquisitive. He seeks the 
patronage of friends and has family pride. He shrinks from unpleasant 
things and dings to pleasant ones. His speech is sour and his stomach 
greedy. 

He that is born with demonic tendencies is deceitful, insolent and 
conceited. He is full of wrath, cruelty and ignorance. In such people 



What is Yoga? 29 


there is neither purity, nor right conduct, nor truth. They gratify their 
passions. Bewildered by numerous desires, caught in the web of 
delusion, these addicts of sensual pleasures fall into hell. 

The working of the mind of persons with different predominating 
gunas may be illustrated by their different ways of approach towards a 
universal commandment like Thou shalt not covet.' A man in whom 
tamo-guna predominates might interpret it thus: 'others should not 
covet what is mine, no matter how I obtained it. If they do, I shall 
destroy them.' The rajo-guna type is a calculating self-interested person 
who would construe the commandment as meaning: 'I will not covet 
others' goods lest they covet mine.' He will follow the letter of the law 
as a matter of policy, but not the true spirit of the law as a matter of 
principle. A person of sattvika temperament will follow both the 
letter and the spirit of the precept as a matter of principle and not of 
policy, as a matter of eternal value. He will be righteous for the sake of 
righteousness alone, and not because there is a human law imposing 
punishment to keep him honest. 

The yogi who is also human is affected by these three gunas. By his 
constant and disciplined study (abhyasa) of himself and of the objects 
which his senses tend to pursue, he learns which thoughts, words and 
actions are prompted by tamas and which by rajas. With unceasing effort 
he weeds out and eradicates such thoughts and he works to achieve a 
sattvika frame of mind. When the sattva-guna alone remains, the human 
soul has advanced a long way towards the ultimate goal. 

Like unto the pull of gravity is the pull of the gunas. As intensive 
research and rigorous discipline are needed to experience the wonder 
of weightlessness in space, so also a searching self-examination and 
the discipline furnished by Yoga is needed by a sadhaka to experience 
union with the Creator of space when he is freed from the pull of the 
gunas. 

Once the sadhaka has experienced the fullness of creation or of 
the Creator, his thirst (trsna) for objects of sense vanishes and he looks 
at them ever after with dispassion (vairagya). He experiences no dis- 
quiet in heat or cold, in pain or pleasure, in honour or dishonour and in 
virtue or vice. He treats the two imposters - triumph and disaster - 
with equanimity. He has emancipated himself from these pairs of op- 
posites. He has passed beyond the pull of the gunas and has become a 
gunatlta (one who has transcended the gunas). He is then free from 
birth and death, from pain and sorrow and becomes immortal. He 
has no self-identity as he lives experiencing the fullness of the Univer- 
sal Soul. Such a man, scorning nothing, leads all things to the path of 
perfection. 


30 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


Dhdrana 

When the body has been tempered by asanas, when the mind has been 
refined by the fire of pranayama and when the senses have been brought 
under control by pratyahara, the sadhaka reaches the sixth stage called 
dharana. Here he is concentrated wholly on a single point or on a task 
in which he is completely engrossed. The mind has to be stilled in order 
to achieve this state of complete absorption. 

The mind is an instrument which classifies, judges and co-ordinates 
the impressions from the outside world and those that arise within 
oneself. 

Mind is the product of thoughts which are difficult to restrain for they 
are subtle and fickle. A thought which is well guarded by a controlled 
mind brings happiness. To get the best out of an instrument, one must 
know how it works. The mind is the instrument for thinking and it is 
therefore necessary to consider how it functions. Mental states are classi- 
fied in five groups. The first of these is the k§ipta state, where the mental 
forces are scattered, being in disarray and in a state of neglect. Here the 
mind hankers after objects, the rago-guna being dominant. The second 
is the viksipta state, where the mind is agitated and distracted. Here 
there is a capacity to enjoy the fruits of one's efforts, but the desires are 
not marshalled and controlled. Then in the mudha state the mind is 
foolish, dull and stupid. It is confounded and at a loss to know what it 
wants and here the tamo-guna predominates. The fourth state of the 
mind is the ekagra (eka = one; agra = foremost) state, where the mind 
is closely attentive and the mental faculties are concentrated on a single 
object or focussed on one point only, with the sattva-guna prevailing. 
The ekagra person has superior intellectual powers and knows exactly 
what he wants, so he uses all his powers to achieve his purpose. At 
times the ruthless pursuit of the desired object, irrespective of the cost 
to others, can create great misery, and it often happens that even if the 
desired object is achieved it leaves behind a bitter taste. 

Arjuna, the mighty bowman of the epic Mahabharata, provides us 
with an example of what is meant by dharana. Once Drona, the pre- 
ceptor of the royal princes, organized an archery contest to test their 
proficiency. They were called upon one by one to describe the target, 
which was pointed out to them. It was a nesting bird. Some princes 
described the grove of trees, others the particular tree or the bough on 
which the nest stood. When Arjuna's turn came, he described first the 
bird. Then he saw only its head, and lastly he could see nothing but 
the shining eye of the bird, which was the centre of the target chosen 
by Drona. 

There is danger, however, of an ekagra person becoming supremely 
egotistical. Where the senses start roaming unchecked, the mind follows 


What i 

suit. They cloud a man's judgement and set him adrift like a battered 
ship on a storm- tossed sea. A ship needs ballast to keep her on an even 
keel and the helmsman needs a star to steer her by. The ekagra person 
needs bhakti (adoration of the Lord) and concentration on divinity to 
keep his mental equilibrium so that he goes on always in the right 
direction. He will not know happiness until the sense of T and 'mine' 
disappears. 

The last mental state is that of niruddha, where the mind (manas), 
intellect (buddhi) and ego (ahamkara) are all restrained and all these 
faculties are offered to the Lord for His use and in His service. Here 
there is no feeling of T and 'mine'. As a lens becomes more luminous 
when great light is thrown upon it and seems to be all light and undis- 
tinguishable from it, so also the sadhaka who has given up his mind, 
intellect and ego to the Lord, becomes one with Him, for the sadhaka 
thinks of nothing but Him, who is the creator of thought. 

Without ekagrata or concentration one can master nothing. Without 
concentration on Divinity, which shapes and controls the universe, one 
cannot unlock the divinity within oneself or become a universal man. 

To achieve this concentration, what is recommended is eka-tattva- 
abhyasa or study of the single element that pervades all, the inmost 
Self of all beings, who converts His one form into many. The sadhaka, 
therefore, concentrates upon aum, which is His symbol, to achieve 
ekagrata. 

Aum: According to Sri Vinoba Bhave, the Latin word Omne and the 
Sanskrit word Aum are both derived from the same root meaning all 
and both words convey the concepts of omniscience, omnipresence and 
omnipotence. Another word for Aum is pranava, which is derived from 
the root nu meaning to praise, to which is added the prefix pra denoting 
superiority. The word, therefore, means the best praise or the best 
prayer. 

The symbol aum is composed of three syllables, namely the letters a, 
u, m, and when written has a crescent and dot on its top. A few instances 
of the various interpretations given to it may be mentioned here to 
convey its meaning. 

The letter a symbolizes the conscious or waking state (jagrata- 
avastha), the letter u the dream state (svapna-avastha) and the letter m 
the dreamless sleep state (su$upta-avastha) of the mind and spirit. The 
entire symbol, together with the crescent and the dot, stands for the 
fourth state (turiya-avastha), which combines all these states and trans- 
cends them. This is the state of samadhi. 

The letters a, u and M symbolize respectively speech (vak), the mind 
(ihanas) and the breath of life (prana), while the entire symbol stands 
for the living spirit, which is but a portion of the divine spirit. 


s Yoga? 31 


32 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


The three letters also represent the dimensions of length, breadth and 
depth, while the entire symbol represents Divinity, which is beyond the 
limitations of shape and form. 

The three letters a, u and m symbolize the absence of desire, fear and 
anger, while the whole symbol stands for the perfect man (a sthita- 
prajna), one whose wisdom is firmly established in the divine. 

They represent the three genders, masculine, feminine and neuter, 
while the entire symbol represents all creation together with the Creator. 

They stand for the three gunas or qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas, 
while the whole symbol represents a gunatita, one who has transcended 
and gone beyond the pull of the gunas. 

The letters correspond to the three tenses - past, present and future 
- while the entire symbol stands for the Creator, who transcends the 
limitations of time. 

They also stand for the teaching imparted by the mother, the father 
and the Guru respectively. The entire symbol represents Brahma Vidya, 
the knowledge of the Self, the teaching which is imperishable. 

The a, u and m depict the three stages of yogic discipline, namely, 
asana, pranayama and pratyahara. The entire symbol represents sam- 
adhi, the goal for which the three stages are the steps. 

They represent the triad of Divinity, namely, Brahma - the creator, 
Visnu - the Maintainer, and 6iva - the Destroyer of the universe. The 
whole symbol is said to represent Brahman from which the universate 
emanates, has its growth and fruition and into which it merges in the 
end. It does not grow or change. Many change and pass, but Brahman 
is the One that ever remains unchanged. 

The letters a, u and m also stand for the mantra Tat Twam Asi' (That 
Thou Art'), the realization of man's divinity within himself. The entire 
symbol stands for this realization, which liberates the human spirit from 
the confines of his body, mind, intellect and ego. 

After realizing the importance of aum, the yogi focusses his attention 
on his beloved Deity adding aum to the name of the Lord. The word 
aum being too vast and too abstract, he unifies his senses, will, intellect, 
mind and reason by focussing on the name of the Lord and adding the 
word aum with one pointed devotion and so experiences the feeling 
and meaning of the mantra. 

The yogi recalls the verses of the Mundakopanisad : Taking as a bow 
the great weapon of the Upanisad, one should put upon it an arrow 
sharpened by meditation. Stretching it with a thought directed to the 
essence of That, penetrate the Imperishable as the mark, my friend. The 
mystic syllable aum is the bow. The arrow is the Self (Atma). Brahman 
is the target. By the undistracted man is It penetrated. One should come 
to be in It, as the arrow in the mark.' 




What is Yoga? 33 


Dhyana 

As water takes the shape of its container, the mind when it contemplates 
an object is transformed into the shape of that object. The mind which 
thinks of the all-pervading divinity which it worships, is ultimately 
through long-continued devotion transformed into the likeness of that 
divinity. 

When oil is poured from one vessel to another, one can observe the 
steady constant flow. When the flow of concentration is uninterrupted, 
the state that arises is dhyana (meditation). As the filament in an electric 
bulb glows and illumines when there is a regular uninterrupted current 
of electricity, the yogi's mind will be illumined by dhyana. His body, 
breath, senses, mind, reason and ego are all integrated in the object 
of his contemplation - the Universal Spirit. He remains in a state of 
consciousness which has no qualification whatsoever. There is no other 
feeling except a state of supreme bliss. Like a streak of lightning the 
yogi sees light that shines beyond the earth and the heavens. He sees 
the light that shines in his own heart. He becomes a light unto himself 
and others. 

The signs of progress on the path of Yoga are health, a sense of 
physical lightness, steadiness, clearness of countenance and a beautiful 
voice, sweetness of odour of the body and freedom from craving. He 
has a balanced, serene and a tranquil mind. He is the very symbol of 
humility. He dedicates all his actions to the Lord and taking refuge in 
Him, frees himself from the bondage of karma (action) and becomes a 
Jivana Mukta (a Liberated Soul). 

'What becomes of him who strives and fails to reach the end of Yoga, 
who has faith, but whose mind wanders away from Yoga?' To this query 
of Arjuna, the Lord Sri Krishna replied: 

'No evil can befall a righteous man. He dwells long years in the 
heaven of those who did good, and then he is reborn in the house 
of the pure and the great. He may even be born in a family of 
illumined yogis; but to be born in such a family is most difficult 
in this world. He will regain the wisdom attained in his former 
life and strives ever for perfection. Because of his former study, 
practice and struggle which drive him ever onwards, the 
yogi ever strives with a soul cleansed of sin, attains perfection 
through many lives and reaches the supreme goal. The yogi 
goes beyond those who only follow the path of austerity, know- 
ledge or service. Therefore, Arjuna, be thou a yogi. The greatest 
of all yogis is he who adores Me with faith and whose heart 
abides in Me.' 


Bhagavad Gita, chapter VI, verses 38 to 47. 


34 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


Samadhi 

Samadhi is the end of the sadhaka's quest. At the peak of his meditation, 
he passes into the state of samadhi, where his body and senses are at 
rest as if he is asleep, his faculties of mind and reason are alert as if he 
is awake, yet he has gone beyond consciousness. The person in a state 
of samadhi is fully conscious and alert. 

All creation is Brahman. The sadhaka is tranquil and worships it as 
that from which he came forth, as that in which he breathes, as that 
into which he will be dissolved. The soul within the heart is smaller 
than the smallest seed, yet greater than the sky, containing all works, 
all desires. Into this the sadhaka enters. Then there remains no sense 
of T or 'mine' as the working of the body, the mind and the intellect 
have stopped as if one is in deep sleep. The sadhaka has attained true 
Yoga; there is only the experience of consciousness, truth and unutter- 
able joy. There is a peace that passeth all understanding. The mind 
cannot find words to describe the state and the tongue fails to utter 
them. Comparing the experience of samadhi with other experiences, 
the sages say: 'Neti! Neti!' - 'It is not this! It is not this!' The state can 
only be expressed by profound silence. The yogi has departed from the 
material world and is merged in the Eternal. There is then no duality 
between the knower and the known for they are merged like camphor 
and the flame. 

There wells up from within the heart of the yogi the Song of the Soul, 
sung by Sankaracharya in his Atma Satkam. 


\ 


Whflt is Yoga? 35 


Song of the Soul 

I am neither ego nor reason, I am neither mind nor thought, 

I cannot be heard nor cast into words, nor by smell nor sight ever 
caught: 

In light and wind I am not found, nor yet in earth and sky - 
Consciousness and joy incarnate. Bliss of the Blissful am I. 

I have no name, I have no life. I breathe no vital air, 

No elements have moulded me, no bodily sheath is my lair: 

I have no speech, no hands and feet, nor means of evolution - 
Consciousness and joy am I, and Bliss in dissolution. 

I cast aside hatred and passion, I conquered delusion and greed; 

No touch of pride caressed me, so envy never did breed: 

Beyond all faiths, past reach of wealth, past freedom, past desire, 
Consciousness and joy am I, and Bliss is my attire. 

Virtue and vice, or pleasure and pain are not my heritage. 

Nor sacred texts, nor offerings, nor prayer, nor pilgrimage: 

I am neither food, nor eating, nor yet the eater am I - 
Consciousness and joy incarnate. Bliss of the Blissful am I. 

I have no misgiving of death, no chasms of race divide me, 

No parent ever called me child, no bond of birth ever tied me: 

I am neither disciple nor master, I have no kin, no friend - 
Consciousness and joy am I, and merging in Bliss is my end. 

Neither know able, knowledge, nor knower am 1, formless is my form, 
I dwell within the senses but they are not my home: 

Ever serenely balanced, I am neither free nor bound - 
Consciousness and joy am I, and Bliss is where I am found. 



PART II 


Yogasanas 


HINTS AND CAUTIONS 

THE REQUISITES 

1. Without firm foundations a house cannot stand. Without the practice 
of the principles of yama and niyama, which lay down firm founda- 
tions for building character, there cannot be an integrated personality. 
Practice of asanas without the backing of yama and niyama is mere 
acrobatics. 

2. The qualities demanded from an aspirant are discipline, faith, ten- 
acity, and perseverance to practice regularly without interruptions. 

CLEANLINESS AND FOOD 

3. Before starting to practise asanas, the bladder should be emptied and 
the bowels evacuated. Topsy-turvy poses help bowel movements. If the 
student is constipated or it is not possible to evacuate the bowels before 
the practice of asanas, start with Sirsasana and Sarvangasana and their 
variations. Attempt other asanas only after evacuation. Never practice 
advanced asanas without having first evacuated the bowels. 

BATH 

4. Asanas come easier after taking a bath. After doing them, the body 
feels sticky due to perspiration and it is desirable to bathe some fifteen 
minutes later. Taking a bath or a shower both before and after practising 
asanas refreshes the body and mind. 

FOOD 

5. Asanas should preferably be done on an empty stomach. If this is 
difficult, a cup of tea or coffee, cocoa or milk may be taken before doing 
them. They may be practised without discomfort one hour after a very 
light meal. Allow at least four hours to elapse after a heavy meal before 
starting the practice. Food may be taken half an hour after completing 
the asanas. 

TIME 

6 . The best time to practise is either early in the morning or late in the 
evening. In the morning asanas do not come easily as the body is stiff. 


38 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


The mind, however, is still fresh but its alertness and determination 
diminish as time goes by. The stiffness of the body is conquered by 
regular practice and one is able to do the asanas as well. In the even- 
ing, the body moves more freely than in the mornings, and the asanas 
come better and with greater ease. Practice in the morning makes one 
work better in one's vocation. In the evening it removes the fatigue 
of the day's strain and makes one fresh and calm. Do all the asanas 
in the morning and stimulative asanas (like Sirsasana, Sarvangasana 
and their variations and Paschimottanasana) should be practised in 
the evening. 

SUN 

7. Do not practise asanas after being out in the hot sun for several 
hours. 

PLACE 

8. They should be done in a clean airy place, free from insects and 
noise. 

9. Do not do them on the bare floor or on an uneven place, but on a 
folded blanket laid on a level floor. 

CAUTION 

10. No undue strain should be felt in the facial muscles, ears and eyes 
or in breathing during the practice. 

CLOSING OF THE EYES 

11. In the beginning, keep the eyes open. Then you will know what 
you are doing and where you go wrong. If you shut your eyes you will 
not be able to watch the requisite movements of the body or even the 
direction in which you are doing the pose. You can keep your eyes 
closed only when you are perfect in a particular asana for only then 
will you be able to adjust the bodily movements and feel the correct 
stretches. 

MIRROR 

12. If you are doing the asanas in front of a mirror, keep it perpendicular 
to the floor and let it come down to ground level, for otherwise the 
poses will look slanting due to the angle of the mirror. You will not be 
able to observe the movements of placing the head and shoulders in 
the topsy-turvy poses unless the mirror reaches down to the floor. Use 
a mirror without a frame. 



Yogasanas 39 


the brain 

13 . During the practice of asanas, it is the body alone which should be 
active while the brain should remain passive, watchful and alert. If they 
are done with the brain, then you will not be able to see your own 
mistakes. 

breathing 

14. In all the asanas, breathing should be done through the nostrils 
only and not through the mouth. 

15 . Do not restrain the breath while in the process of the asana or while 
staying in it. Follow the instructions regarding breathing given in the 
technique sections of the various asanas as described hereafter. 

6 AV AS AN A 

16 . After completing the practice of asanas always lie down in &avasana 
for at least 10 to 15 minutes, as this will remove fatigue. 

asanas and pranayama 

17 . Read carefully the hints and cautions for the practice of pranayama 
before attempting it (see Part III). Pranayama may be done either very 
early in the morning before the asanas or in the evening after completing 
them. If early in the morning, pranayama may be done first for 15 to 
30 minutes: then a few minutes of Savasana, and after allowing some 
time to elapse during which one may be engaged in normal activities, 
practise asanas. If, however, these are done in the evening, allow at 
least half an hour to elapse before sitting for pranayama. 

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PERSONS SUFFERING FROM 
DIZZINESS OR BLOOD PRESSURE 

18 . Do not start with Slr$asana and Sarvangasana if you suffer from 
dizziness or high blood pressure. First practise Paschimottanasana 
Uttanasana, and Adho Mukha &vanasana before attempting topsy-turvy 
poses like £ir$asana and Sarvangasana and after doing these poses 
repeat Paschimottanasana, Adho Mukha Svanasana and Uttanasana in 
that order. 

19 . All forward bending poses are beneficial for persons suffering from 
either high or low blood pressure. 

SPECIAL WARNING FOR PERSONS AFFECTED FROM PUS IN 
THE EARS OR DISPLACED RETINA 

20 . Those suffering from pus in the ears or displacement of the retina 
should not attempt topsy-turvy poses. 


40 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR WOMEN 

21. Menstruation: Avoid asanas during the menstrual period. But if the 
flow is in excess of normal, Upavisfha Konasana, Baddha Konasana, 
Virasana, Janu 6ir$asana, PaSchimottanasana and Uttanasana will be 
beneficial. On no account stand on your head nor perform sarvanga- 
sana, during the menstrual period. 

22. Pregnancy : All the asanas can be practised during the first three 
months of pregnancy. All the standing poses and the forward bending 
asanas may be done with mild movements, for at this time the spine 
should be made strong and elastic and no pressure be felt on the abdo- 
men. Baddha Konasana and Upavi$tha Konasana may be practised 
throughout pregnancy at any time of the day (even after meals, but 
not forward bending immediately after meals) as these two asanas will 
strengthen the pelvic muscles and the small of the back and also reduce 
labour pains considerably. Pranayama without retention (kumbhaka) 
may be practised throughout pregnancy, as regular deep breathing will 
help considerably during labour. 

23. After delivery: No asanas should be done during the first month after 
delivery. Thereafter they may be practised mildly. Gradually increase 
the course as mentioned in the Appendix. Three months after delivery 
all asanas may be practised with comfort. 

EFFECTS OF ASANAS 

24. Faulty practice causes discomfort and uneasiness within a few days. 
This is sufficient to show that one is going wrong. If you cannot find 
the fault yourself, it is better to approach a person who has practised 
well and get his guidance. 

25. The right method of doing asanas brings lightness and an exhilarat- 
ing feeling in the body as well as in the mind and a feeling of oneness 
of body, mind and soul. 

26. Continuous practice will change the outlook of the practises He 
will discipline himself in food, sex, cleanliness and character and will 
become a new man. 

27. When one has mastered an asana, it comes with effortless ease and 
causes no discomfort. The bodily movements become graceful. While 
performing asanas, the student's body assumes numerous forms of life 
found in creation - from the lowliest insect to the most perfect sage - 
and he learns that in all these there breathes the same Universal Spirit 
- the Spirit of God. He looks within himself while practising and feels 
the presence of God in different asanas which he does with a sense of 
surrender unto the feet of the lord. 



technique and effects of asanas 


(After the name of each asana, there is a number with an asterisk. These numbers before an 
asterisk indicate the intensity of the as ana; the lower the number, the easier the asana, the higher 
the number, the more difficult the asana,) 


arms parallel with the body. The 
fingers together and pointing 
downwards. Each of the 
standing poses described below 
fada means a mountain . Sama can then be followed easily, 

means upright, straight , unmoved. starting with the pupil standing 
Sthiti is standing still , steadiness, in Tadasana with palms by the 

Td4dsana therefore implies a pose side of the thighs. 
where one stands firm and erect as a 
mountain. This is the basic standing 

EFFECTS 

pose. 

People do not pay attention to the 
correct method of standing. Some 

TECHNIQUE . - ... ... . * 

stand with the body weight 

1. Stand erect with the feet thrown only on one leg, or with 

together, the heels and big toes one leg turned completely 
touching each other. Rest the sideways. Others bear all the 

heads of metatarsals on the floor weight on the heels, or on the 

and stretch all the toes flat on the inner or outer edges of the feet, 

floor. This can be noticed by watching 

where the soles and heels of the 

2. Tighten the knees and pull the shoes wear out. Owing to our 

knee-caps up, contract the hips faulty method of standing and not 
and pull up the muscles at the distributing the body weight 
back of the thighs. evenly on the feet, we acquire 

specific deformities which 

3. Keep the stomach in, chest hamper spinal elasticity. Even if 

forward, spine stretched up and the feet are kept apart, it is better 

the neck straight. to keep the heel and toe in a line 

parallel to the median plane and 

4. Do not bear the weight of the not at an angle. By this method, 

body either on the heels or the the hips are contracted, the 

toes, but distribute it evenly on abdomen is pulled in and the 
them both. chest is brought forward. One 

feels light in body and the mind 

5. Ideally in Tadasana the arms acquires agility. If we stand with 
are stretched out over the head, the body weight thrown only on 
but for the sake of convenience, the heels, we feel the centre of 
one can place them by the side of gravity changing; the hips become 
*he thighs. In this case, keep the loose, the abdomen protrudes, 


1 | Tadasana 

(also called Sanmsthiti) 
one* 


the body hangs back and the 
spine feels the strain and 
consequently we soon feel 
fatigued and the mind becomes 
dull. It is therefore essential to 
master the art of standing 
correctly. 




hand. Keep the right knee locked 
tight by pulling up the knee-cap 
and keep the right knee facing the 
toes. 


2 | Utthita Trikonasana 

THREE* 


Utthita means extended, stretched , 
Trikona (tri = three; kona = angle) 
is a triangle. This standing dsana is 
the extended triangle pose. 


6. Remain in this position from 
half a minute to a minute, 
breathing deeply and evenly. 
Then lift the right palm from the 
floor. Inhale and return to 
position 2 above. 


TECHNIQUE 


1. Stand in Tadasana. (Plate I) 


7. Now, turn the left foot 
sideways 90 degrees to the left, 
turn the right foot slightly to the 
left, keep both knees tight and 
continue from position 2 to 6, 
reversing all processes. Inhale and 
come to position 2. Hold the 
posture for the same length of 
time on the left side. 


2. Inhale deeply and with a jump 
spread apart the legs sideways 
3 to 3Vi feet. Raise the arms 
sideways, in line with the 
shoulders, palms facing down. 
Keep the arms parallel to the 
floor, (Plate 2) 


3. Turn the right foot sideways 
90 degrees to the right. Turn the 
left foot slightly to the right, 
keeping the left leg stretched from 
the inside and tightened at the 
knee. 


8. Exhale, and jump, coming 
back to Tadasana. (Plate 1) 


This a sana tones up the leg 

muscles, removes stiffness in the 

legs and hips, corrects any minor 

deformity in the legs and allows 

them to develop evenly. It 

relieves backaches and neck 

sprains, strengthens the ankles 

<- , tl , , and develops the chest. 

5. Stretch the left arm up (as in r 

the illustration), bringing it in line 

with the right shoulder and 

extend the trunk. The back of the 

legs, the back of the chest and the 

hips should be in line. Gaze at 

the thumb of the outstretched left 


4. Exhale, bend the trunk 
sideways to the right, bringing 
the right palm near the right 
angle. If possible, the right palm 
should rest completely on the 
floor. (Plates 3 and 4) 


Yogas anas 43 



3 | Utthita 
Pdrsvakondsana 

FOUR* 

Pdriva meat is side or flank , Kona is 
arc angle. This is the extended lateral 
angle pose. 


technique 

X. Stand in Tadasana. (Plate 1) 
Take a deep inhalation and with 
a jump spread the legs apart 
sideways 4 to 4V^ feet. Raise the 
arms sideways, in line with the 
shoulders, palms facing down. 
(Plate 2) 


2* While exhaling slowly, turn 
the right foot sideways 90 degrees 
to the right, and the left foot 
slightly to the right, keeping the 
left leg stretched out and 
tightened at the knee. Bend the 
right leg at the knee until the 
thigh and the calf form a right 
angle and the right thigh is 
parallel to the floor. 


3. Place the right palm on the 
floor by the side of the right foot, 
the right armpit covering and 
touching the outer side of the 
right knee. Stretch the left arm 
out over the left ear. Keep the 
head up. (Plates 5 and 6) 


4* Tighten the loins and stretch 
the hamstrings. The chest, the 
hips and the legs should be in a 
line and in order to achieve this, 
move the chest up and back. 
Stretch every part of the body, 
concentrating on the back portion 
of the whole body, specially the 
spine. Stretch the spine until all 
the vertebrae and ribs move and 


6 

there is a feeling that even the 
skin is being stretched and pulled, 

5. Remain in this pose from half 
a minute to a minute, breathing 
deeply and evenly. Inhale and lift 
the right palm from the floor. 

6. Inhale, straighten the right leg 
and raise the arms as in position 1. 

7. Continue with exhalation as in 
positions 2 to 5, reversing all 
processes, on the left side. 


8. Exhale and jump back to 
Tadasana. (Plate 1) 

EFFECTS 

This asana tones up the ankles, 
knees and thighs. It corrects 
defects in the calves and thighs, 
develops the chest and reduces 
fat round the waist and hips and 
relieves sciatic and arthritic pains. 
It also increases peristaltic activity 
and aids elimination. 



TECHNIQUE 

1. Stand in Tadasana, {Plate \) 

2. Raise both arms above the 
head; stretch up and join the 
palms. (Plate 7) 

3. Take a deep inhalation and 
with a jump spread the legs 
apart sideways 4 to 4 Vz feeh 

4. Exhale, turn to the right. 
Simultaneously turn the right 


foot 90 degrees to the right and 
the left foot slightly to the right. 
(Plate 8) Flex the right knee till 
the right thigh is parallel to the 
floor and the right shin 
perpendicular to the floor, 
forming a right angle between the 
right thigh and the right calf. The 
bent knee should not extend 
beyond the ankle, but should be 
in line with the heel. 

5. Stretch out the left leg and 
tighten at the knee. 


6. The face, chest and right knee 
should face the same way as the 
right foot, as illustrated. Throw 
the head up, stretch the spine 
from the coccyx and gaze at the 
joined palms. (Plate 9) 

7. Hold the pose from 20 seconds 
to half a minute with normal 
breathing. 

8. Repeat on the left side as in 
positions 4 to 6, reversing all 
processes. 


4| Vtrabhadrasana I 

THREE* 

Dak$a once celebrated a great 
sacrifice, but he did not invite his 
daughter Sari nor her husband £iva, 
the chief of the gods . Safi , however, 
went to the sacrifice, hut being 
greatly humiliated and insulted threw 
herself into the fire and perished , 
When Siva heard this he was gravely 
provoked , tore a hair from his matted 
locks and threw it to the ground. A 
powerful hero named Virabhadra rose 
up and awaited his orders * He was 
told to lead Siva's army against 
Dak$a and destroy his sacrifice , 
Virabhadra and his army appeared in 
the midst of Daksa's assembly like a 
hurricane and destroyed the sacrifice, 
routed the other gods and priests and 
beheaded Dak^a. Siva in grief for Satl 
withdrew to Kailas and plunged into 
meditation. 5a ti was born again as 
Umd in the house of Himalaya . She 
strove once more for the love of Siva 
and ultimately won his heart. The 
story is told by Kalidasa in his great 
poem Kumara sambhava (The Birth 
of the War-Lord ). This dsana is 
dedicated to the powerful hero created 
by Stofl from his matted hair . 



Y o g a $ a n a $ 45 


9. Exhale and jump back to 
Tadasana. (Plate 1) 

All standing poses are strenuous, 
this pose in particular. It should 
not be tried by persons with a 
weak heart. Even people who are 
fairly strong should not stay long 
in this asana. 

effects 

In this pose the chest is fully 
expanded and this helps deep 
breathing. It relieves stiffness in 
shoulders and back, tones up the 
ankles and knees and cures 
stiffness of the neck. It also 
reduces fat round the hips. 


5 | Virabhadrasana II 

ONE* 

TECHNIQUE 

1, Stand in Tadasana, (Plate 1) 

2, Take a deep inhalation, and 
with a jump spread the legs apart 
sideways 4 to 4 V 2 feet. Raise the 
arms sideways in line w r ith the 
shoulders, palms facing down. 
(Plate 2) 

3, Turn the right foot sideways 
90 degrees to the right and the 
left foot slightly to the right, 
keeping the left leg stretched out 
and tightened at the knee. Stretch 
the hamstring muscles of the left 
leg, 

4 , Exhale and bend the right 
knee till the right thigh is parallel 
to the floor, keeping the right 
shin perpendicular to the floor, 



thus forming a right angle 
between the right thigh and the 
right calf. The bent knee should 
not extend beyond the ankle, but 
should be in line with the heel. 
(Plate 10) 

5, Stretch out the hands 
sideways, as though two persons 
are pulling you from opposite 
ends. 

6, Turn the face to the right and 
gaze at the right palm. Stretch the 
back muscles of the left leg fully. 
The back of the legs, the dorsal 
region and the hips should be in 
one line. 


9, Inhale, again come back to 
position 2. Exhale and jump back 
to Tadasana, (Plate 1) 

EFFECTS 

Through this pose the leg 
muscles become shapely and 
stronger. It relieves cramp in the 
calf and thigh muscles, brings 
elasticity to the leg and back 
muscles and also tones the 
abdominal organs. 

Mastery of the standing poses 
prepares the pupil for the 
advanced poses in forward 
bending, which can then be 
acquired with ease. 


7. Stay in the pose from 20 
seconds to half a minute with 
deep breathing. Inhale and 
return to position 2, 

8, Turn the left foot sideways 90 
degrees to the left and the right 
foot slightly to the left, flex the 
left knee and continue from 
positions 3 to 6 on the left side, 
reversing all processes. 


46 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 



12 


6 | Parsvottandsana 

SIX* 

Pdrsva means side or flank. Uttdna 
(ut = intense , and tan = to extend, 
stretch, lengthen) means an intense 
stretch. The name implies a pose in 
which the side of the chest is stretched 
intensely. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Stand in Tadasana. (Plate 1) 
Inhale deeply and stretch the 
body forward. 

2. Join the palms behind the back 
and draw the shoulders and 
elbows back. 

3. Exhale, turn the wrists and 
bring both palms up above the 
middle of the back of the chest, 
the fingers at the level of the 
shoulder-blades. You are doing 
'namaste' (the Indian gesture of 
respect by folding the hands) 
with your hands behind your 
back. (Plate 11) 

4. Inhale and with a jump spread 
the legs apart sideways 3 to 3 l /z 
feet. Stay in this position and 
exhale. 

5. Inhale and turn the trunk to 
the right. Turn the right foot 90 
degrees sideways to the right 
keeping the toes and heel in a 
line with the trunk; turn the left 
foot with the leg 75 to 80 degrees 
to the right and keep the left foot 
stretched out and the leg 
tightened at the knee. Throw the 
head back. (Plate 12) 


6. Exhale, bend the trunk 
forward and rest the head on the 
right knee. Stretch the back and 
gradually extend the neck until 
the nose, then the lips and lastly 
the chin touch and then rest 
beyond the right knee. (Plate 13) 
Tighten both the legs by pulling 
the knee-caps up. 

7. Stay in the pose from 20 
seconds to half a minute with 
normal breathing. Then slowly 
move the head and trunk 
towards the left knee by swinging 
the trunk round the hips. At the 
same time turn the left foot 90 
degrees towards the left and the 
right foot 75 to 80 degrees to the 
left. Now raise the trunk and head 
as far back as you can, without 
bending the right leg. This 
movement should be done with 
one inhalation. 

8. Exhale, bend the trunk 
forward, rest the head on the left 
knee and gradually extend the 
chin beyond the left knee by 
stretching the neck as in 
position 6. 

9. After holding the pose from 20 
seconds to half a minute with 
normal breathing, inhale, move 
the head to the centre and the feet 
to their original position so that 
the toes point forward. Then raise 
the trunk up. 

10. Exhale and jump back to 
Tadasana (Plate 1), releasing the 
hands from the back. 

11. If you cannot fold the hands 
together behind the back, just grip 
the right wrist and follow the 
above technique. (Plate 14) 





EFFECTS 


This asana relieves stiffness in the 
legs and hip muscles and makes 
the hip joints and spine elastic. 
While the head is resting on the 
knees, the abdominal organs are 
contracted and toned. The wrists 
move freely and any stiffness 
there disappears. The posture 
also corrects round and drooping 
shoulders. In the correct pose, the 
shoulders are drawn well back 
and this makes deep breathing 
easier. 



2. Inhale, place the hands on the 
waist and spread the legs apart 
AVi to 5 feet, (Plate 15) 


3, Tighten the legs by drawing 
up the knee-caps. Exhale, and 
place the palms on the floor in 
line with the shoulders between 
the feet. (Plate 16) 


4. Inhale and raise the head up, 
keeping the back concave. 


Prasarita means expanded, spread , 
extended. Pdda means a foot . The 
pose is one where the expanded legs 
are stretched intensely , 


TECHNIQUE 
1. Stand in Tadasana, 


(Plate 1) 


7| Prasarita 
Padottanasana 

FOUR* 



5 , Exhale, bend the elbows and 
rest the crown of the head on the 
floor, keeping the weight of the 
body on the legs. (Plates 17 and 
18) Do not throw the body weight 
on the head. Both feet, both palms 
and the head should be in a 
Straight line. 

6, Stay in the pose for half a 
minute, breathing deeply and 
evenly, 

7, Inhale, raise the head from the 
floor and straighten the arms at 
the elbows. Keep the head well 
up by making the back concave as 
in position 4. (Plate 16) 

8, Exhale and stand as in 
position 2. (Plate 15} 

9, Jump back to Tadasana. 

(Plate 1) 

EFFECTS 

In this pose the hamstring and 
abductor muscles are fully 
developed, while blood is made 
to flow to the trunk and the head. 
People who cannot do Slr^asana 
(Plate 90) can benefit from this 
pose, which increases digestive 
powers. 

All the standing poses 
described above are necessary 
for beginnings. As the pupil 
advances he attains better 
flexibility and then the standing 
poses can be dispensed with, 
though it is advisable to do them 
once a week. All these standing 
poses help to reduce the body 


50 The Illustrated light on Yoga 




8 | Ustrasana 

THREE* 

Ustra means a camel. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Kneel on the floor, keeping 
the thighs and feet together, toes 
pointing back and resting on the 
floor. 

2, Rest the palms on the hips. 
Stretch the thighs, curve the spine 
back and extend the ribs. 

(Plate 19) 

3* Exhale, place the right palm 
over the right heel and the left 
palm over the left heel. If 
possible, place the palms on the 
soles of the feet. 

4. Press the feet with the palms, 
throw the head back and push the 
spine towards the thighs, which 
should be kept perpendicular to 
the floor. 


5 , Contract the buttocks and 
stretch the dorsal and the coccyx 
regions of the spine still further, 
keeping the neck stretched back. 
(Plate 20) 


6. Remain in this position for 
about half a minute with normal 
breathing. 


7. Release the hands one by one 
and rest them on the hips. (Plate 
19) Then sit on the floor and 
relax. 


EFFECTS 

People with drooping shoulders 
and hunched backs will benefit by 
this asana. 

The whole spine is stretched 
back and is toned. This pose can 
be tried conveniently by the 
elderly and even by persons with 
spinal injury. 


9] Padangusthasana 

THREE* 


Pdda means the foot. Angus tha is the 
big toe . This posture is done ty 
standing and catching the big toes. 


TECHNIQUE 

1. Stand in Tadasana. (Plate 1) 
Spread the legs a foot apart. 

2 . Exhale, bend forward and 
hold the big toes between the 
thumbs and the first two fingers, 
so that the palms face each other. 
Hold them tight. (Plate 21) 

3. Keep the head up, stretch the 
diaphragm towards the chest and 
make the back as concave as 
possible. Instead of stretching 
down from the shoulders, bend 
forward from the pelvic region 
to get the concave shape of the 
back from the coccyx. 

4. Keep the legs stiff and do not 
slacken the grip at the knees and 
toes. Stretch the shoulder-blades 
also. Take one or two breaths in 
this position. 


Yogdsan as 51 



5, Now exhale, and bring the 
head in between the knees by 
tightening and pulling the toes 
without lifting them off the floor, 
(Plate 22) Remain in this pose for 
about 20 seconds, maintaining 
normal breathing. 


io| Pddahastasana 

SIX* 

Pdda means the foot > Hasta means the 
hantf. This posture is done by bending 
fonvard and standing on one's hands. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Stand in Tadasana. (Plate 1) 
Spread the legs a foot apart. 

2. Exhale, bend forward and 
without bending the legs at the 
knees insert the hands under the 
feet so that the palms touch the 
soles, (Plate 23) 

3. Keep the head up and make 
the back as concave as possible. 
Do not slacken the grip at the 
knees and take a few breaths in 
this position. 

4. Now exhale, and move the 
head in between the knees by 
bending the elbows and pulling 
the feet up from the palms. (Plate 
24) Stay in the pose for about 20 
seconds with normal breathing. 

5. Inhale, raise the head and 
come back to position 2 (Plate 
23), with the head well up. Take 
two breaths. 


6. Inhale, come to position 2 
(Plate 21), release the toes and 
stand up. Return to Tadasana, 
(Plate 1) 


6. Inhale, stand up and return to 
Tadasana. (Plate 1) 



24 



1 


52 The Illustrated Li 
EFFECTS OF 

PADANGUSTHASANA and 
PADAHASTASANA 

The second asana is more 
strenuous than the first, but the 
effects of both are the same. The 
abdominal organs are toned and 
digestive juices increase, while 
the liver and spleen are activated. 
Persons suffering from a bloating 
sensation in the abdomen or 
from gastric troubles will benefit 
from practising these two 
asanas. 

Slipped spinal discs can only be 
adjusted in the concave back 
position as in Plates 21 and 23. 

Do not bring the head in between 
the knees if you have a displaced 
disc. I have experimented with 
persons suffering from slipped 
discs and the concave back 
position proved a boon to them. 

It is imperative to get guidance 
from a guru (master) before 
trying this pose, because it may 
not be possible to achieve the 
concave back position 
immediately. One has to master 
other minor poses before 
attempting this one. 


h t on Yoga 

ll | Uttandsana 

EIGHT* 

Ut is a particle indicating 
deliberation , intensity. The verb tan 
means to stretch , extend , lengthen 
out. In this asana , the spine is given 
a deliberate and an intense stretch. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Stand in Tadasana (Plate 1), 
keeping the knees tight. 

2. Exhale, bend forward and 
place the fingers on the floor. 
Then place the palms on the floor 
by the side of the feet, behind 
the heels. Do not bend the legs 
at the knees. 

3. Try to hold the head up and 
stretch the spine. Move the hips a 
little forward towards the head so 
as to bring the legs perpendicular 
to the floor. 

4. Remain in this position and 
take two deep breaths. 

5. Exhale, move the trunk closer 
to the legs and rest the head on 
the knees. (Plate 25) 

6. Do not slacken the grip at the 
knees, but pull the knee-caps well 
up. Hold this position for a 
minute with deep and even 
breathing. 

7. Inhale and raise the head from 
the knees, but without lifting the 
palms from the floor as in 
position 3. 

8. After two breaths, take a deep 
inhalation, lift the hands from the 
floor and come back to Tadasana. 
(Plate 1) 



EFFECTS 

This asana cures stomach pains 
and tones the liver, the spleen 
and the kidneys. It also relieves 
stomach pain during menstrual 
periods. The heart beats are 
slowed down and the spinal 
nerves rejuvenated. Any 
depression felt in the mind is 
removed if one holds the pose for 
two minutes or more. The 
posture is a boon to people who 
get excited quickly, as it soothes 
the brain cells. After finishing the 
asana, one feels calm and cool, the 
eyes start to glow and the mind 
feels at peace. 

Persons who feel heaviness in 
the head, flushing or any 
discomfort w'hile attempting 
6lr$asana (Plate 90), should do 
Uttanasana first; then they will be 
able to do Sir$asana (the head 
stand) with comfort and ease. 

J 


V ogdsanas 53 


12 | Salabhasana 

ONE* 

fyilabha means a focust. The pose 
resembles that of a locust resting on 
the ground , hence the name. 


technique 

1. Lie full length on the floor on 
the stomach, face downwards. 
Stretch the arms back. 

2. Exhale, lift the head, chest and 
legs off the floor simultaneously 
as high as possible. The hands 
should not be placed and the ribs 
should not rest on the floor. Only 
the abdominal front portion of the 
body rests on the floor and bears 
the weight of the body. (Plate 26) 

3. Contract the buttocks and 
stretch the thigh muscles. Keep 
both legs fully extended and 
straight, touching at the thighs, 
knees and ankles. 




4. Do not bear the weight of the 
body on the hands but stretch 
them back to exercise the upper 
portion of the back muscles. 

5. Stay in the position as long as 
you can with normal breathing. 

6. In the beginning it is difficult 
to lift the chest and the legs off the 
floor, but this becomes easier as 
the abdominal muscles grow 
stronger. 


EFFECTS 

The pose aids digestion and 
relieves gastric troubles and 
flatulence. Since the spine is 
stretched back it becomes elastic 
and the pose relieves pain in the 
sacral and lumbar regions. In my 
experience, persons suffering 
from slipped discs have 
benefited by regular practice of 
this asana without recourse to 
enforced rest or surgical 
treatment. The bladder and the 
prostate gland also benefit from 


the exercise and remain healthy. 

A variation of the pose may 
also be tried to relieve aches in the 
lower part of the back. Here, the 
legs are bent at the knees and the 
thighs are kept apart white the 
shins are kept perpendicular to 
the floor. Then with an 
exhalation, the thighs are lifted 
off the floor and brought closer 
together until the knees touch, the 
shins still being kept 
perpendicular. (Plate 27) 



54 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


13 | Dhanurasana 

FOUR* 

Dhattu means a bow. The hands here 
are used like a bowstring to pull the 
head , trunk and legs up and the 
posture resembles a bent bow. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Lie full length on the floor on 
the stomach, face downwards. 

2. Exhale and bend the knees. 
Stretch the arms back and hold 
the left ankle with the left hand 
and the right ankle with the right 
hand. Take two breaths. 

3. Now exhale completely and 
pull the legs up by raising the 
knees above the floor, and 
simultaneously lift the chest off 
the floor. The arms and hands act 
like a bow-string to tauten the 
body like a bent bow. (Plate 28) 


4. Lift up the head and pull it as 
far back as possible. Do not rest 
either the ribs or the pelvic bones 
on the floor. Only the abdomen 
bears the weight of the body on 
the floor. 

5. While raising the legs do not 
join them at the knees, for then 
the legs will not be lifted high 
enough. After the full stretch 
upwards has been achieved, join 
together the thighs, the knees 
and the ankles. 

6. Since the abdomen is 
extended, the breathing will be 
fast, but do not worry about it. 
Stay in the pose to your capacity 
from 20 seconds to one minute. 

7. Then, with an exhalation, 
release the ankles, stretch the legs 
straight, bring the head and the 
legs back to the floor and relax. 



EFFECTS 

In this posture the spine is 
stretched back. Elderly people do 
not normally do this, so their 
spines get rigid. This asana brings 
back elasticity to the spine and 
tones the abdominal organs. In 
my experience, persons suffering 
from slipped discs have obtained 
relief by the regular practice of 
Dhanurasana and &alabhasana 
(Plate 26) without being forced to 
rest or to undergo surgical 
treatment. 


14 ) Chaturahga 
Dattdasana 

ONE* 

Chatur means four. Ahga means a 
limb or a part thereof. Danda means 
a staff. Lie flat on the floor , face down 
and take the weight of the body on 
the palms and toes , exhale and keep 
the body parallel to the floor, stiff as 
a staff. The four limbs supporting the 
body are the hands and feet. The pose 
is similar to dips in western 
gymnastics. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Lie flat on the floor, face 
downwards. 

2. Bend the elbows and place the 
palms by the side of the chest. 
Keep the feet about a foot apart. 


28 


Yogas anas 55 




2, Rest the palms by the side of 
the pelvic region, 

3, Inhale, press the palms firmly 
on the floor and lift the body up 
from the trunk until the pubis is 
in contact with the floor and stay 
in this position with the weight 
on the legs and palms. (Plate 31) 

4, Contract the anus and the 
buttocks, tighten the thighs. 

5* Maintain the pose for about 
20 seconds, breathing normally. 


30 

3* With an exhalation, raise the 
whole body a few inches above 
the floor, balancing it on the 
hands and the toes, (Plate 29) 
Keep the body stiff as a staff, 
parallel to the floor from head to 
heel and the knees taut. Stay for 
some time with normal 
breathing. 

4. Then gradually extend the 
whole body forward so that the 
feet rest on the upper portion of 
the toes on the floor. {Plate 30) 

5. Stay in the pose for about 30 
seconds with normal or deep 
breathing. The movement may be 
repeated several times. Then relax 
on the floor. 

EFFECTS 

The pose strengthens the arms 
and the wrists develop mobility 
and power. It also contracts and 
tones the abdominal organs. 


15 ] Bhujahgasana I 

ONE* 

Bhujanga means a serpent. In this 
posture H lie flat on the poor , face 
downwards, lift the body up from the 
trunk and throw tfre head back tike a 
serpent about to strike. 

TECHNIQUE 

1, Lie on the floor face 
downwards. Extend the legs, 
keeping the feet together. Keep 
the knees tight and the toes 
pointing. 


6. Exhale, bend the elbows and 
rest the trunk on the floor. Repeat 
the pose two or three times and 
then relax. 

EFFECTS 

The posture is a panacea for an 
injured spine and in cases of 
slight displacement of spinal 
discs the practice of this pose 
replaces the discs in their original 
position. The spinal region is 
toned and the chest fully 
expanded. 



56 


The Illustrated light on Yoga 


16| Urdhva Mulch a 
Svdndsana 

ONE* 

Urdhva Mukha means having the 
mouth upwards, Svtiw means a 
dog. The pose resembles a dog 
stretching itself with the head up in 
the air, hence the name. 

TECHNIQUE 

X. Lie on the floor on the 
stomach, face downwards. 


4. Keep the legs straight and 
tightened at the knees, but do 
not rest the knees on the floor 
The weight of the body rests on 
the palms and toes only. 

(Plate 32} 

5. The spine, thighs and calves 
should be fully stretched, and 
the buttocks contracted tight. 
Push the chest forward, stretch 
the neck fully and throw the head 
as far back as possible. Stretch 
also the back portions of the 
arms. 


2* Keep the feet about one foot 
apart. The toes should point 
straight back. Place the palms on 
the floor by the side of the. waist, 
the fingers pointing to the head. 


6. Stay in the pose from half a 
minute to a minute with deep 
breathing, 

7. Bend the elbows, release the 
stretch and rest on the floor. 



EFFECTS 

The pose rejuvenates the spine 
and is specially recommended for 
people suffering from a stiff back. 
The movement is good for 
persons with lumbago, sciatica 
and those suffering from slipped 
or prolapsed discs of the spine. 
The pose strengthens the spine 
and cures backaches. Due to 
chest expansion, the lungs gain 
elasticity. The blood circulates 
properly in the pelvic region and 
keeps it healthy. 


3, Inhale, raise the head and 
trunk, stretch the arms 
completely and push the head 
and trunk as far back as possible, 
without resting the knees on the 
floor. 


17] Adho Mukha 
Svdndsana 

FIVE* 

Adho Mukha means having the face 
downwards. &vana means a dog. 

The pose resembles a dog stretching 
itself with head and forelegs down 
and the hind legs up, hence the name. 

TECHNIQUE 

X, Lie full length on the floor on 
the stomach, face dowmwards. 
The feet should be kept one foot 
apart. 

2, Rest the palms by the side of 
the chest, the fingers straight and 
pointing in the direction of the 
head, 

3, Exhale and raise the trunk 
from the floor. Straighten the 
arms, move the head inwards 
towards the feet and place the 
crown of the head on the floor, 
keeping the elbows straight and 
extending the back, (Side view; 
Plate 33, Back view: Plate 34) 

4, Keep the legs stiff and do not 
bend the knees but press the heels 
down. The heels and soles of the 
feet should rest completely on the 
floor, while the feet should be 
parallel to each other, the toes 
pointing straight ahead, 

5, Stay in the pose for about a 
minute with deep breathing. 
Then with an exhalation lift the 
head off the floor, stretch the 
trunk forward and lower the 
body gently to the floor and 
relax. 


32 




Yogdsanas 57 



33 


effects 

When one is exhausted, a longer 
stay in this pose removes fatigue 
and brings back the lost energy. 
The pose is especially good for 
runners who get tired after a hard 
race. Sprinters will develop speed 
and lightness in the legs. The 
pose relieves pain and stiffness in 
the heels and helps to soften 
calcaneal spurs. It strengthens 
the ankles and makes the legs 
shapely. The practice of this 
asana helps to eradicate stiffness 
in the region of the 
shoulder-blades, and arthritis of 
the shoulder joints is relieved. 
The abdominal muscles are 
drawn towards the spine and 
strengthened. As the diaphragm 
is lifted to the chest cavity the rate 
of the heart beat is slowed down. 
This is an exhilarating pose. 

Those who are afraid to do 
£lr$asana (Plate 90) can 
conveniently practise this 
position. As the trunk is lowered 
in this asana it is fully stretched 
and healthy blood is brought to 
this region without any strain on 
the heart. It rejuvenates the 
brain cells and invigorates the 
brain by relieving fatigue. 

Persons suffering from high 
blood pressure can do this pose. 



Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched in front. Place the palms 
on the floor by the hips, the 
fingers pointing to the feet. 
Stretch the hands straight and 
keep the back erect. (Plate 35) 


18 j Dandasana 

TWO* 

Danda means a staff or rod. 


TECHNIQUE 



58 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


19 1 Paripuma Navdsana 

TWO* 



Paripuma means entire or complete. 
Vw posture here resembles that of a 
boat with oars , hence the name . 

TECHNIQUE 

1* Sit on the floor as in 
Dandasana {18 above), 

2. Exhale, recline the trunk 
slightly back and simultaneously 
raise the legs from the floor and 
keep them stiff as a poker with 
the knees tight and the toes 
pointing forwards. Balance is 
maintained only on the buttocks 
and no part of the spine should 
be allowed to touch the floor, 
from which the legs should be 
kept at an angle of 60 to 65 
degrees. The feet are higher than 
the head and not level with it as 
in Ardha Navasana. (Plate 37) 

3, Remove the hands from the 
floor and stretch the arms 
forward; keeping them parallel to 
the floor and near the thighs. 

The shoulders and the palms 
should be on one level, and the 
palms should face each other. 
(Plate 36) 



4. Stay in the pose for half a 
minute, with normal breathing. 
Gradually increase the time to 
one minute. One feels the effect 
of the exercise after only 20 
seconds. 

Eh Then exhale, lower the hands, 
rest the legs on the floor and relax 
by lying on the back. 


EFFECTS 

This asana gives relief to persons 
who feel a bloating sensation in 
the abdomen due to gas and also 
to those suffering from gastric 
complaints. It reduces fat around 
the waistline and tones the 
kidneys. 


Yogdsanas 59 


20 1 Ardha Navdsana 

TWO* 

Ardfta means half. Nava is a ship, 
boat or vessel This posture 
resembles the shape of a boat , hence 
the name. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor. Stretch the 
legs out in front and keep them 
straight. (Plate 35) 

2. Interlock the fingers and place 
them on the back of the head just 
above the neck. 

3. Exhale, redine the trunk back 
and simultaneously raise the legs 
from the floor, keeping the thighs 
and knees tight and the toes 
pointed. The balance of the body 
rests on the buttocks and no part 
of the spine should be allowed to 
touch the floor. (Plate 37) One 
feels the grip on the muscles of 
the abdomen and the lower back. 

4* Keep the legs at an angle of 
about 30 to 35 degrees from the 
floor and the crown of the head 
in line with the toes. 

5, Hold this pose for 20 to 30 
seconds with norma! breathing. 
A stay for one minute in this 
posture indicates strong 
abdominal muscles. 


6, Do not hold the breath during 
this asana, though the tendency is 
always to do it with suspension 
of breath after inhalation. If the 
breath is held, the effect will be 
felt on the stomach muscles and 
not on the abdominal organs. 
Deep inhalation in this asana 
would loose the grip on the 
abdominal muscles. In order to 
maintain this grip, inhale, exhale 
and hold the breath and go on 
repeating this process but 
without breathing deeply. This 
will exercise not only the 
abdominal muscles but the organs 
also. 

71 The difference between Ardha 
Navasana and Paripuma 
Navasana should be noted; in the 
latter, the legs are moved higher 
and the distance between them 
and the stomach is less than in 
the former. 


EFFECTS 

The effects of Ardha Navasana 
and that of Paripuma Navasana 
(Plate 36) differ due to the 
position of the legs. In Paripurna 
Navasana the exercise is effective 
on the intestines; whereas, Ardha 
Navasana works on the liver, gall 
bladder and spleen. 

In the beginning, the back is 
too weak to bear the strain of the 
pose. When power to retain this 


pose comes, it indicates that the 
back is gaining strength. A weak 
back is a handicap in many ways, 
especially to women as they need 
strong backs for child-bearing. 
These two asanas coupled with 
lateral twistings of the spine will 
help to strengthen the back. 

The importance of having a 
healthy lower back can be 
realized if we watch old people 
when they sit down, get up and 
walk, for consciously or 
unconsciously they support their 
backs with their hands. This 
indicates that the back is weak and 
cannot withstand the strain. As 
long as it is strong and needs no 
support, one feels young though 
advanced in age. The two asanas 
bring life and vigour to the back 
and enable us to grow old 
gracefully and comfortably. 


60 The Illustrated Light on Toga 


21 1 Siddhdsana 

ONE* 

Siddha means a semi-divine being 
supposed to be of great purity and 
holiness , and to possess supernatural 
faculties called siddhis. Siddha 
means also an inspired sage, seer or 
prophet, 

' The Siddhas say that as among 
niyamas t the most important is not to 
harm anyone , and among the yamas 
a moderate diet, so is Siddhdsana 
among the asanas / 

' Of the 84 lacs of asanas, one 
should always practise Siddhdsana. It 
purifies 72 f QOO nddts. (Nadfs are 
channels in the human body through 
which nervous energy passes.) 

The yogin practising 
contemplation upon Atman and 
observing a moderate diet, if he 
practises Siddhdsana for twelve years, 
obtains the yoga siddhis/ (Atman 
means the Self and the supreme Soul, 
Siddhis are supernatural faculties .) 

'W hen Siddhdsana is mastered , the 
Unmam Avasthd (Samddhi) that 
gives delight follows without effort 
and naturally/ 

The soul has three avasthds or 
conditions which are included in a 
fourth , They are waking, .dreaming, 
sleeping and what is called Turly a. 

*' The first condition is that of 
wakefulness f where the self is 
conscious of the common world of 
gross objects. It enjoys gross things. 
Here the dependence of body is 
predominant . The second condition is 
that of dreaming, where the self 
enjoys subtle things, fashioning for 
itself a new world of forms from the 


material of its waking experience. The 
spirit is said to roam freely unfettered 
by the bonds of the body. The third 
condition is that of sound sleep f 
where we have neither dreams nor 
desires. It is called susupti. In it the 
soul is said to become temporarily one 
with Brahman and to enjoy bliss. In 
deep sleep we are lifted above all 
desires and freed from the vexations 
of spirit, . ♦ , The soul is divine in 
origin, though clogged with the flesh. 
In sleep it is said to be released from 
the shackles of the body and to regain 
its own nature, . , . But this (that is, 
the eternal dreamless sleep) is likely 
to be confused with sheer 
unconsciousness. , . . The highest is 
not this dreamless sleep, but 
another, a fourth state of the soul, a 
pure intuitional consciousness where 
there is no knowledge of objects 
internal or external. In deep sleep the 
spirit dwells in a region far above the 
changeful life of sense to absolute 
union with Brahman. The turlya 
condition brings out the positive 
aspect of the negative emphasized in 
the condition of deep sleep . ' 

Radhakrishnan in Philosophy 
of the Upanishads. 

This fourth condition has been thus 
described in the Mdndukya 
Upanishad as follows: 

T he fourth, say the wise, is not 
subjective experience, nor objective 
experience, nor experience 
intermediate between the two , nor is 
it a negative condition which is 
neither consciousness nor 
unconsciousness, Jt is not the 
knowledge of the senses, nor is it 
relative knowledge, nor yet 
inferential knowledge. Beyond the 
senses, beyond understanding, 
beyond all expression, is the fourth. 


It is pure unitary consciousness, 
wherein all awareness of the world 
and of multiplicity is completely 
obliterated. It is the supreme good. 

It is One without a second. It is the 
Self. Know it aloneT 
'Raja-Yoga, Samddhi, Unmam, 
Manomant, Immortality , 
Concentration, Sunydiunya (mid 
and yet non-void), Parama Pada (the 
Supreme State), Amanaska 
(suspended operation of the mind), 
Advaita (non-duality), Nirdlamba 
(without support), Nirahjana 
(pure), Jivanmukti (emancipated 
state), Sahajdvasihd (natural state) 
and Turiyd (literally the Fourth), all 
mean the same thing. As a grain of 
salt thrown into water unites and 
becomes one with it, a like union 
between the Mind and the Atman is 
Samddhi. When Prana and Manas 
(mind) are annihilated (absorbed), the 
state of harmony then arising is called 
Samddhi/ 

Hatha Yoga Pradlpika, 

chapter IV, verses 3 to 6. 

There is no dsana like Siddha, no 
kumbhaka like Kevala, no mudrd like 
Khecharf, and no laya (absorption of 
the mind) like Ndda, 

(Khecharf Mudrd, literally 
roaming through space, is described 
in the Gheranda Samhita as follows 
in verses 25 to 28 of the third chapter: 

' Cut the lower tendon of the tongue 
and move the tongue constantly; rub 
it with fresh butter, and draw it out 
(to lengthen it) with an iron 
instrument. By practising this 
always, the tongue becomes long and 
when it reaches the space between the 
eyebrows, then Khecharf is 
accomplished. Then ( the tongue being 
lengthened) practise turning it up and 
back so as to touch the palate, till at 


j 


Yogdsanas 61 



length it reaches the holes of the 
nostrils opening into the mouth. 

Close those holes with the tongue 
(thus stopping inspiration), and gaze 
on the space between the eyebrows. 
This is called Khechari. By this 
practice there is neither fainting, nor 
hunger, nor thirst, nor laziness. 

There comes neither disease, nor 
decay, nor death. The body becomes 
divine. ') 

(Nada is the inner mystical sound. 
Verses 79 to 101 of the fourth 
chapter describes it in great detail 
with a variety of similes. Yoga is 
defined as control over the aberrations 
of the mind. In order to control the 
mind it is necessary that it should 
first be absorbed in concentration of 
some object, then it is gradually 
withdrawn from that object and 
made to look within one's own self. 
This is where the yogi is asked to 
concentrate upon the inner mystical 
sounds. ' The mind is like a serpent, 
forgetting all its unsteadiness by 
hearing Nada, it does not run away 
anywhere.' Gradually as Nada 
becomes latent so does the mind 
along with it. The fire, catching the 
wood , is extinguished along with it 
(after burning it up); and so the mind 
also, working with Nada, becomes 
latent along with it.') 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor, with legs 
stretched straight in front. 

(Plate 35) 

2. Bend the left leg at the knee. 
Hold the left foot with the hands, 
place the heel near the perineum 
and rest the sole of the left foot 
against the right thigh. 


38 

3. Now bend the right leg at the 
knee and place the right foot over 
the left ankle, keeping the right 
heel against the pubic bone. 

4. Place the sole of the right foot 
between the thigh and the calf of 
the left leg. 

5. Do not rest the body on the 
heels. 

6. Stretch the arms in front and 
rest the back of the hands on the 
knees so that the palms face 
upwards. Join the thumbs and the 
forefingers and keep the other 
fingers extended. (Plate 38). 

7. Hold this position as long as 
you can, keeping the back, neck 
and head erect and the vision 
indrawn as if gazing at the tip of 
the nose. 


8. Release the feet and relax for 
some time. Then repeat the pose 
for the same length of time, now 
placing the right heel near the 
perineum first and then the left 
foot over the right ankle as 
described above. 

EFFECTS 

This posture keeps the pubic 
region healthy. Like Padmasana 
(Plate 53), it is one of the most 
relaxing of asanas. The body 
being in a sitting posture is at 
rest, while the position of the 
crossed legs and erect back keeps 
the mind attentive and alert. 

This asana is also recommended 
for the practice of pranayama 
and for meditation. 

From the purely physical point 
of view, the asana is good for 
curing stiffness in the knees and 
ankles. In it the blood circulates 
in the lumbar region and the 
abdomen, and this tones the 
lower region of the spine and 
the abdominal organs. 



62 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 



22 1 Vtrasana 

ONE* 

Vira means a hero t warrior , 
champion . This sitting posture is 
done by keeping the knees together , 
spreading the feet and resting them 
by the side of the hips . 

The pose is good for meditation and 
prdpdydma . 

TECHNIQUE 

1, Kneel on the floor. Keep the 
knees together and spread the 
feet about 18 inches apart 

2. Rest the buttocks on the floor, 
but not the body on the feet. The 
feet are kept by the side of the 
thighs, the inner side of each calf 
touching the outer side of its 
respective thigh. Keep the toes 
pointing back and touching the 
floor. Keep the wrists on the 
knees, palms facing up, and join 
the tips of the thumbs and 
forefingers. Keep the other 
fingers extended. Stretch the 
back erect. (Back view: Plate 42. 
Front view: Plate 43) 

3* Stay in this position as long as 
you can, with deep breathing. 

4* Now interlock the fingers and 
stretch the arm straight over the 
head, palms up. (Plate 44) 

5, Stay in this position for a 
minute with deep breathing. 

6, Exhale, release the fingerlock, 
place the palms on the soles, 
bend forward and rest the chin 
on the knees. (Plate 45) 


7* Stay in this position for a 
minute with normal breathing. 

8, Inhale, raise the trunk up, 
bring the feet forward and relax. 

9, If you find it difficult to 
perform the pose as described 
above, try placing the feet one 
above the other and rest the 
buttocks on them. (Plate 39) 
Gradually move the toes further 
apart, separate the feet (Plates 
40 and 41) and bring them to rest 
outside the thighs. Then, in time 
the buttocks will rest properly on 
the floor and the body will not rest 
on the feet. 

EFFECTS 

The pose cures rheumatic pains 
in the knees and gout, and is also 
good for flat feet. Due to the 
stretching of the ankles and the 
feet, proper arches will be 
formed. This, however, takes a 
long time and requires daily 
practice of the pose for a few 
minutes for several months. 
Those suffering from pain in the 
heels or growth of calcaneal spurs 
there will get relief and the spurs 
will gradually disappear. 

The pose can even be done 
immediately after food and will 
relieve heaviness in the stomach. 



64 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


23 j Supta Virasana 

TWO* 

Supta means lying down , In this 
asana one reclines back on the floor 
and stretches the arms behind the 
head , 

TECHNIQUE 

1* Sit in Virasana, (Plate 43} 

2. Exhale, recline the trunk back 
and rest the elbows one by one on 
the floor. (Plate 46) 



3. Relieve the pressure on the 
elbows one after the other by 
extending the arms. 

4. At first rest the crown of the 
head on the floor. {Plate 47) 
Gradually rest the back of the 
head and then the back on the 
floor. {Plate 48) Take the arms 
over the head and stretch them 
out straight, (Plate 49) Hold this 
pose as long as you can while 
breathing deeply. Then place the 
arms beside the trunk, press the 
elbows to the floor and sit up 
again with an exhalation. 

5. The hands may be stretched 
over the head or placed beside 
the thighs. When they are 
stretched over the head, do not 
raise the shoulder-blades from 
the floor. 

6. Beginners may keep the knees 
apart. 






r 

effects 

This a Sana stretches the 
abdominal organs and the pelvic 
region. People whose legs ache 
will get relief from holding this 
pose for 10 to 15 minutes and it 
is recommended to athletes and 
all who have to walk or stand 
about for long hours. It can be 
done after meals and if before 
retiring at night the legs feel 
rested next morning. Several of 
my pupils who were cadets at 
the National Defence Academy 
after long route marches found 
great relief by combining this 
asana with Sarvangasana 1. 
(Plate 102) 



24 | Baddha Kon asana 

three* 

Baddha weans caught , restrained. 
Koqa means an angle, in this 
posture, sit on the floor , bring the 
heels near the perineum , catch the feet 
and widen the thighs until the knees 
touch the floor on either side . This is 
how Indian cobblers sit . 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched straight in front. 

(Plate 35} 

2. Bend the knees and bring the 
feet closer to the trunk. 

3. Bring the soles and heels of 
the feet together and catching 
the feet near the toes, bring the 
heels near the perineum. The 
outer sides of both feet should 
rest on the floor, and the back of 
the heels should touch the 
perineum. 




5i 


4* Widen the thighs and lower 
the knees until they touch the 
floor. 

5. Interlock the fingers of the 
hands, grip the feet firmly, stretch 
the spine erect and gaze straight 
ahead or at the tip of the nose. 
(Plate 50) Hold the pose as long 
as you can. 

6. Place the elbows on the thighs 
and press them down. Exhale, 


bend forward, rest the head, then 
the nose and lastly the chin on 
the floor. (Plate 51) Hold this 
position from half a minute to a 
minute with normal breathing, 

7. Inhale, raise the trunk from 
the floor and come back to 
position 5, {Plate 50) 

8. Then release the feet, 
straighten the legs and relax. 


66 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 





EFFECTS 

The pose is specially 
recommended for those suffering 
from urinary disorders. The 
pelvis, the abdomen and the 
back get a plentiful supply of 
blood and are stimulated, it keeps 
the kidneys, the prostate and the 
urinary bladder healthy. It is 
well known that diseases of the 
urinary tract are rarely found 
among the Indian cobblers and 
the reason for that is that they sit 
all day in this pose. 

It relieves sciatic pain and 
prevents hernia. If practised 
regularly, it relieves pain and 
heaviness in the testicles. 

The pose is a blessing to 
women. Coupled with 
Sarvangasana i (Plate 102) and its 
cycle (Plates 113 to 125) it checks 
irregular menstrual periods and 
helps the ovaries to function 
properly. It is found that 
pregnant women who sit daily in 


this pose for a few minutes will 
have much less pain during 
delivery and wiil be free from 
varicose veins. (If is 
recommended for pregnant 
women in Dr Grantly Dick Reed's 
book Childbirth Without Fear.) 

Along with Padmasana (Plate 
53) and Virasana (Plate 43) this 
a Sana is recommended for 
Pranayama practice and for 
meditation. When sitting in 
meditation in this pose the 
palms should be folded in front 
of the chest (Plate 52), but to do 
this with the back erect requires 
practice. This asana can be done 
without fear even after meals as 
long as the head is not rested on 
the floor. 


25 Padmasana 

FOUR* 

Padma means a lotus. This is the 
lotus posture, one of the most 
important and useful asanas. It is the 
posture for meditation and the 
Buddha is often depicted in it. 

Verse 48 of the first chapter of the 
Hatha Yoga Pra dipika describes 
the posture and the practice of breath 
control while seated in it thus : 

' Assuming Padmasana and having 
placed the palms one upon another , 
fix the chin firmly upon the breast 
and contemplating upon Brahman, 
frequently contract the anus and raise 
the apana up; by simitar contraction 
of the throat force the prana down. 
By this he obtains unequalled 
knowledge through the favour of 
Kundalini (which is roused by this 
process )/ 

Kundalini is the Divine Cosmic 
Energy in bodies. It is symbolized 
a coiled and sleeping serpent in the 
lowest bodily centre at the base of the 
spinal column. This latent energy has 
fa be awakened and made to go up 
the spine to the brain through 
Su$umna Nadi , a channel through 
which nervous energy passes , and 
through the six chakras , fhe subtle 
centres in the body , flic fly-wheels in 
the nervous system of the human 
machine. The awakening of 
Kundalini is discussed in detail in 
Arthur Avalon's (Sir John 
Woodroffe's) book entitled The 
Serpent Power, 

This is one of the basic postures 
and is often used in the variations of 
Slrtfsana and Sarvangasana. 


A 



Y ogd sa na s 67 


technique 

X. Sit on the floor with the legs 
straight. (Plate 35) 

2 , Bend the right leg at the knee, 
hold the right foot with the 
hands and place it at the root of 
the left thigh so that the right 
heel is near the navel. 

3 , Now bend the left leg, and 
holding the left foot with the 
hands place it over the right at 
the root, the heel being near the 
navel. The soles of the feet 
should be turned up. This is the 
basic Padmasana pose. {Plate 53) 

4, People not used to sitting on 
the floor seldom have flexible 
knees. At the start they will feel 
excruciating pain around the 
knees. By perseverance and 
continued practice the pain will 
gradually subside and they can 
then stay in the pose comfortably 
for a tong time. 



5. From the base to the neck the 
Spine should remain erect. The 
arms may be stretched out, the 
right hand being placed on the 
right knee and the left hand on 
the left knee. The forefingers 
and the thumbs are bent and 
touch each other, 

6. Change the leg position by 
placing the left foot over the 
right thigh and the right foot over 
the left thigh. This will develop 
the legs evenly. 


EFFECTS 

After the initial knee pains have 
been overcome, Padmasana is 
one of the most relaxing poses. 
The body being in a sitting 
posture, it is at rest without being 
sloppy. The position of the 
crossed legs and the erect back 
keeps the mind attentive and 
alert. Hence it is one of the asanas 
recommended for practising 
pranayama (breath control). 

On the purely physical level, 
the pose is good for curing 
stiffness in the knees and ankles. 
Since the blood is made to 
circulate in the lumbar region and 
the abdomen, the spine and the 
abdominal organs are toned. 



68 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


26 1 Parvatasana 

FOUR* 

Parvata means a mountain , In this 
variation of Padmfisana the arms are 
stretched over the head with the 
fingers interlocked. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit in Padmasana, (Plate 53) 

2. Interlock the fingers, and 
stretch the hands vertically up 
over the head. Keep the head 
bent forward with the chin on the 
breast bone. 

3. Stretch the arms up frorn the 
latissimus dorsi (near the 
floating ribs at the back) and the 
shoulder-blades. The palms 
should face upwards. (Plate 54} 

4. Hold the pose for a minute or 
two with deep and even 
breathing. Change the crossing of 
the legs and the interlock of the 
fingers and repeat the pose, 
keeping the back erect. 

EFFECTS 

The a sana relieves rheumatic 
pains and stiffness in the 
shoulders. It helps draw free 
movement and to develop the 
chest. The abdominal organs are 
drawn in and the chest expands 
fully. 



34 


27 1 Matsyasana 

FIVE* 

Matsya means a fish. This posture is 
dedicated to Matsya the Fish 
Incarnation of Vi$nu, the source and 
maintainer of the universe and of all 
things- It is related that once upon a 
time the whole earth had become 
corrupt and was about to be 
overwhelmed by a universal flood , 
Vi$nu took the form of a fish and 
warned Manu (the Hindu Adam) of 
the impending disaster. The fish then 
carried Manu, his family and the 
sei'en great sages in a ship, fastened 
to a horn on his head. It also saved 
the Vedas from the flood. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit in Padmasana. (Plate 53) 

2, Lie flat on the back with the 
legs on the floor. 


3, Exhale, arch the back by lifting 
the neck and the chest, take the 
head back and rest the crown on 
the floor. Drag the head further 
back by holding the crossed legs 
with the hands and increase the 
back arch. (Plate 55} 

4, Now take the hands from the 
legs, bend the arms, hold the 
elbows with the hands and rest 
the forearms on the floor behind 
the head. (Plate 56) 

5, Stay in this position from 30 to 
60 seconds while breathing 
deeply, 

6, Rest the back of the head on 
the floor, lie flat on the back, 
inhale and then come up to 
Padmasana, release the legs and 
relax, 

7, Recross the legs the other way 
and repeat the pose for the same 
length of time. 

8, If positions 3 and 4 are difficult 
to achieve, lie flat on the back with 
the arms stretched straight over 
the head. (Plate 57) 

EFFECTS 

The dorsal region is fully 
extended in this posture and the 
chest is well expanded. Breathing 
becomes fuller. The thyroids 
benefit from the exercise due to 
the stretching of the neck. The 
pelvic joints become elastic. The 
a sana relieves inflamed and 
bleeding piles. 






70 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


28 1 Baddha Padmasatta 

SIX* 

Baddha means caught , restrained. In 
this position the hands are crossed at 
the back and the big toes are caught 
from behind. The body is caught 
between the crossed tegs in front and 
the crossed hands behind, hence the 
name. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit in Padmasana, (Plate 53} 

2, Exhale, swing the left arm 
back from the shoulders and 
bring the hand near the right hip. 
Catch the left big toe, hold the 
position and inhale, 

3* Similarly, with an exhalation, 
swing the right arm back from the 
shoulder, bring it near the left hip 
and catch the right big toe. (Front 
view: Plate 58, Back view: Plate 
59) 

4. If the toes are difficult to catch 
stretch the shoulders back, so that 
the shoulder-blades are brought 
near each other. A little practice 
in swinging the arms back with 
an exhalation will enable one to 
catch the big toes. 

5, If the right foot is placed over 
the left thigh and then the left foot 
over the right thigh, catch the left 
big toe first and then the right big 
toe. If, on the other hand, the left 
foot is placed over the right thigh 
first and then the right foot over 
the left thigh, catch the right big 
toe first and then the left big toe. 
Catch first the big toe of the foot 
which is uppermost. 



59 


6. Throw the head as far back as 
possible and take a few deep 
breaths. 

7. Inhale deeply, and then with 
an exhalation bend the trunk 
forward from the hips and rest 
the head on the floor, without 
releasing the toes from the hand 
grip. Bending the head forward in 
Baddha Padmasana (Plate 58) and 
touching it on the floor is called: 


29 1 Yoga Mudrasana 

SIX* 

Tfrrs dsam is especially useful in 
awakening Kundalmi. 

EFFECTS 

Crossing the hands behind the 
back expands the chest and 
increases the range of shoulder 
movement. Yoga Mudrasana 
(Plate 60) intensifies the 
peristaltic activity and pushes 
down the accumulated waste 
matter in the colon and thereby 
relieves constipation and 
increases digestive power. 


30 | Maha Mudra 

FIVE* 

Malta means great or noble. Mudra 
means shutting , closing or sealing. 

In this sitting posture the apertures 
at the fop and bottom of the trunk 
are held fast and sealed. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched in front. (Plate 35) 

2. Bend the left knee and move 
it to the left, keeping the outer 
side of the left thigh and the left 
calf on the floor. 

3. Place the left heel against the 
inner side of the left thigh near 
the perineum. The big toe of the 
left foot should touch the inner 
side of the right thigh. The angle 
between the extended right leg 
and the bent left leg should be a 
right angle of 90 degrees. 


Y ogdsanas 7 1 



60 

4, Stretch the arms forward 
towards the right foot and hook 
the big toe with the thumbs and 
forefingers. 

5, Lower the head to the trunk 
until the chin rests in the hollow 
between the collar bones just 
above the breast-bone. 


9. Relax the abdominal tension, 
exhale, raise the head, release 
the hands and straighten the bent 
leg. 

10* Repeat on the other side, 
keeping the left leg straight and 
the right one bent for an equal 
length of time* 


EFFECTS 

This asana tones the abdominal 
organs, the kidneys and adrenal 
glands. Women suffering from a 
prolapsed womb find relief as it 
pulls the womb up to its original 
position* Persons suffering from 
spleen ailments and from 
enlargement of the prostate gland 
will benefit by staying in this 
pose longer. It cures indigestion* 
'This Mahamudra destroys 
death and many other pains. 
There is nothing that one cannot 
eat or has to avoid (if one has 
practised it). All food regardless 
of taste and even when deadly 
poisonous is digested/ 'He who 
practices Mahamudra, 
overcomes consumption, 
leprosy, piles, enlargement of the 
spleen, indigestion and other 
complaints of long duration/ 
(Hatka Yoga Pradtpika , chapter 3, 
verses 14, 16 and 17*) 


6. Keep the spine fully stretched 
and do not allow the right leg to 
tilt to the right* 

7, Inhale completely. Tighten the 
entire abdomen from the anus to 
the diaphragm. Pull the abdomen 
back towards the spine and also 
up towards the diaphragm* 

8* Relax the abdominal tension, 
then exhale, again inhale and 
hold the breath, maintaining the 
abdominal grip. Hold this posture 
as stated above from one to three 
minutes* (Plate 61) 



61 


72 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


31 1 Janu Sirsasana 

FIVE* 

Jmw means the knee. Slrsa is the 
head . In this posture sit with one leg 
stretched out on the ground and the 
other bent at the knee. Then catch 
the extended foot with both the hands 
and place the head on that knee. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor, with legs 
stretched straight in front. 

(Plate 35) 

2. Bend the left knee and move 
it to the left, keeping the outer 
side of left thigh and the left calf 
on the floor. 

3. Place the left heel against the 
inner side of the left thigh near 
the perineum. The big toe of the 
left foot should touch the inner 
side of the right thigh. The angle 
between the two legs should be 
obtuse. Do not keep the left knee 
in line with the left thigh at a 
right angle to the extended right 
leg. Try and push the left knee 
as far back as possible, so that the 
body is stretched from the bent 
leg. 

4. Extend the arms forward 
towards the right foot and hold it 
with the hands. First catch the 
toes of the right foot, then 
gradually catch the sole, then Lhe 
heel and finally extend the arms 
and catch the wrist of one hand 
with the other, beyond the 
outstretched foot. (Plate 62) 



5. Keep the right leg stretched 
throughout by tightening the 
knee- See that the back of the 
right knee rests on the floor. 

6. Exhale, move the trunk 
forward by bending and 
widening the elbows, and rest 
first the forehead, then the nose, 
then the Ups and lastly the chin 
beyond the right knee. (Plate 63) 
The right foot will tilt to the right 
in the beginning. Do not allow 
the leg to tilt. 

7. Stretch the back fully, pull the 
trunk forward and keep the chest 
against the right thigh. 


8. Stay in this position with deep 
breathing from half a minute to 

a minute. One can also do the 
pose holding the breath after 
each exhalation. 

9. Inhale, raise the head and 
trunk, straighten the arms and 
gaze up for a few seconds, 
extending the spine and trying to 
make it concave. (Plate 62) 

10. Release the hand grip on the 
right foot, straighten the left leg 
and come back to position 1 . 

11. Repeat the pose keeping the 
left leg stretched out and 
bending the right leg at the knee. 
Stay in the pose for the same 
length of time on both the sides. 


Yogdsan as 73 


effects 

This asana tones the liver and the 
spleen and thereby aids 
digestion. It also tones and 
activates the kidneys, the effect on 
which can be felt while one is 
performing the pose as explained 
above. 

Persons suffering from 
enlargement of the prostate 
gland will benefit by staying 
longer in this pose. They should 
practice this asana along with 
Sarvangasana. (Plate 102) 

The pose is also recommended 
for people suffering from low 
fever for a long time. 



32 1 Ardha Baddha Padma 

Pa schimo 1 1 d n asana 

eight* 

Ardha means half , baddha means 
caught , restrained and padma a 
lotus. Paschimottdndsana (Plate 81) 
is the posture where the back of the 
whole body is intensely stretched. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor, with the legs 
stretched straight in front, 

(Plate 35) 

2 . Bend the left leg at the knee, 
and place the left foot over the 
right thigh. The left heel should 
press the navel and the toes 
should be stretched and pointing. 
This is the half lotus posture. 



3, Bring the left arm round the 
back from behind and with an 
exhalation catch the big toe of the 
left foot. If the toe cannot be 
grasped easily, swing back the 
left shoulder. 


4 . After holding the left big toe, 
move the bent left knee nearer 
to the extended right leg. Stretch 
the right arm forward and catch 
the right foot with the right 
hand, the palm touching the 
sole. (Plates 64 and 65) 



74 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 




5. Inhale, stretch the back and 
gaze up for a few seconds, 
without releasing the grip on the 
left big toe. 

6* Exhale, move the trunk 
forward by bending the right 
elbow outwards. Rest the 
forehead, then the nose, then the 
lips and lastly the chin on the 
right knee. (Plate 66) 

7* In the initial stages, the knee 
of the extended leg will be lifted 
off the floor. Tighten the thigh 
muscles and rest the entire back 
of the extended right leg on the 
floor. 

8, Stay in this position from 30 to 
60 seconds, breathing evenly. 


9. Inhale, raise the head and 
trunk, release the hands, 
straighten the left leg and come 
to position 1. 

10. Repeat the pose on the other 
side, keeping the left leg stretched 
out on the ground, bending the 
right knee and placing the right 
foot on the left thigh. Stay for the 
same length of time on both sides, 

11. If you cannot hold the toe 
with the hand from behind, hold 
the extended leg with both hands 
and follow' the above techniques. 
(Plate 67) 


EFFECTS 

Due to the half lotus pose, the 
knees become flexible enough to 
execute the full lotus pose. While 
placing the chin on the knee of the 
extended leg, the bent knee is 
brought dose to the stretched leg. 
This gives a good pull to the navel 
and abdominal organs. Blood is 
made to flow round the navel and 
the genital organs. The navel is 
considered to be a nerve centre, 
and the Svadhisthana Chakra, 
one of the purificatory fly-wheels 
in the human nervous system, is 
situated there. This chakra 
corresponds to the hypo-gastric 
plexus. The pose is 
recommended for persons with 
rounded and drooping 
shoulders. 


Y o g a s a n a s 75 



33 1 Triahgd 

Mukhaikapda 

Paschimottdndsana 

FIVE* 

Trianga means three limbs or parts 
thereof. In this posture the three 
parts are the feet, knees and buttocks , 
ftf ukhaikapada (a compound of three 
words t mukha = face f eka = one , and 
pada = teg or foot) corresponds to the 
face (or mouth) foudiing one 
(extended) leg. In Paschimottdndsana 
(Plate 81) the back of the whole body 
is intensely stretched . 

technique 

1* Sit on the floor, with the legs 
stretched straight in front. 

(Plate 35) 

2* Bend the right leg at the knee 
and move the right foot back. 
Place the right foot by the side of 
the right hip joint, keep the toes 
pointing back and rest them on 
the floor. The inner side of the 
right calf will touch the outer side 
of the right thigh. 

3. Balance in this position, 
throwing the weight of the body 
on the bent knee. In the 
beginning, the body tilts to the 
side of the outstretched leg, and 
the foot of the outstretched leg 
also tilts outwards. Learn to 
balance in this position, keeping 
the foot and toes stretched and 
pointing forward. 

4. Now hold the left foot with 
both the palms, gripping the sides 
of the sole. If you can, then 
extend the trunk forward and 
hook the wrists round the 


outstretched left foot. (Plate 68) 
Take two deep breaths. It usually 
takes several months before one 
can hook the wrists in this way, 
so do not despair after the first 
few attempts. 

5, Join the knees, exhale and 
bend forward. Rest first the 
forehead, then the nose, next the 
Ups and ultimately the chin on 
the left knee, (Plate 69) To 
achieve this, widen the elbows 
and push the trunk forward with 
an exhalation. 

6. Do not rest the left elbow on 
the floor. In the beginning, one 
loses balance and topples over to 
the side of the extended leg. The 
trunk should, therefore, be 


slightly bent towards the side of 
the bent leg and the weight of the 
body should be taken by the bent 
knee, 

7. Stay in this position from half 
a minute to a minute, breathing 
evenly. 

8. Inhale, raise the head and 
trunk, release the hands, 
straighten the right leg and come 
to position 1, 

9* Repeat the pose on the other 
side, keeping the right leg 
stretched out on the ground, 
bending the left knee and placing 
the left foot by the left hip joint. 
Stay for the same length of time 
on both sides. 



76 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


EFFECTS 

This asana is recommended for 
persons suffering from dropped 
arches and flat feet. It cures 
sprains in the ankle and the knee, 
and any swelling in the leg is 
reduced. 

Along with Janu £lr$asana 
(Plate 63) and Ardha Baddha 
Padma Paschimottanasana (Plate 
66), this asana tones the 
abdominal organs and keeps 
them free from sluggishness. We 
abuse our abdominal organs by 
over-indulgence or by 
conforming to social etiquette. 
Abdominal organs cause a 
majority of diseases and ancient 
sages emphasized that their 
health was essential for 
longevity, happiness and peace of 
mind. These forward bending 
asanas keep the abdominal 
organs healthy and in trim. Apart 
from keeping the muscles in 
shape, they work on the organs 
as well. 


34 1 Martchyasana I 

FIVE* 

This asana is dedicated to the sage 
Marichi, son of the Creator , 

Brahma. Marichi was the grandfather 
of Surya ( the Sun God). 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched straight in front. 

(Plate 35) 

2. Bend the left knee and place 
the sole and heel of the left foot 
flat on the floor. The shin of the 
left leg should be perpendicular to 
the floor and the calf should 
touch the thigh. Place the left 
heel near the perineum. The 
inner side of the left foot should 
touch the inner side of the 
outstretched right thigh. 


3. Stretch the left shoulder 
forward till the left armpit touches 
the perpendicular left shin. Turn 
the left arm round the left shin 
and thigh, bend the left elbow 
and throw the left forearm behind 
the back at the level of the waist. 
Then move the right hand 
behind the back and clasp the left 
hand with the right at the wrist or 
vice versa. If that is not possible 
then clasp the palms or the 
fingers. (Plate 70) 

4. Now, turn the spine to the 
left, keeping the outstretched 
right leg straight. Remain in this 
position gazing at the 
outstretched right big toe and 
take a few deep breaths. 




70 



Yogasanas n 


5. Exhale, and bend forward. 

Rest the forehead, then the nose, 
next the lips and lastly the chin 
on the right knee. (Plate 71) 

While in this position, keep both 
shoulders parallel to the floor 
and breathe normally. Stay in the 
pose for about 30 seconds and 
see that the back of the entire 
extended leg rests on the floor 
throughout. 

6 . Inhale, raise the head from the 
right knee (Plate 70), release the 
hands, straighten the left leg and 
come to position 1. 

7. Repeat the pose on the other 
side for an equal length of time. 


EFFECTS 

The fingers gain in strength by 
the practice of this asana. In the 
preceding asanas (namely, Janu 
6lr$asana (Plate 63), Ardha 
Baddha Padma 
Paschimottanasana (Plate 66) 
and Triang Mukhaikapada 
Paschimottanasana (Plate 69) the 
abdominal organs are made to 
contract by gripping a leg with the 
hands. In this pose the hands do 
not hold the legs. To bend 
forward and to rest the chin on 
the knee of the extended leg the 
abdominal organs have to 
contract vigorously. This creates a 
better circulation of blood round 
the abdominal organs and keeps 
them healthy. In the beginning it 
is very difficult to bend forward 
at all after gripping both hands 
behind the back, but it comes with 
practice. The dorsal region of the 
spine is also exercised in this pose. 


NOTE 

The four poses, Janu 6ir$asana, 
Ardha Baddha Padma 
Paschimottanasana, Triang 
Mukhaikapada 
Paschimottanasana and 
Marichyasana I, are preparatory 
poses for the correct 
Paschimottanasana. (Plate 81) It 
is difficult for many to get a good 
grip on the feet in 
Paschimottanasana even after 
several attempts. These four 
asanas give one sufficient 
elasticity in the back and legs so 
that one gradually achieves the 
correct Paschimottanasana (Plate 
81) as described later. Once this 
is done with ease, these four 
asanas can be practised once or 
twice a week instead of daily. 


78 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 



35 1 Upavistha Kondsana 

NINE* 

Upavistha means seated. Kona means 
an angle. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched straight in front. 

(Plate 35) 

2. Move the legs sideways one 
by one and widen the distance 
between them as far as you can. 
Keep the legs extended 
throughout and see that the back 
of the entire legs rests on the floor. 

3. Catch the big toes between the 
respective thumbs and index and 
middle fingers. 

4. Keep the spine erect and 
extend the ribs. Pull the 


72 

diaphragm up and hold the pose 
for a few seconds with deep 
breaths. (Plate 72) 

5. Now clasp the feet with the 
hands. Exhale, bend forward and 
rest the head on the floor. (Plate 
73) Then extend the neck and 
place the chin on the floor. 


6. Then, try to rest the chest on 
the floor. (Plate 74) Stay in this 
position from 30 to 60 seconds 
with normal breathing. 

7. Inhale, raise the trunk off the 
floor (Plate 72) and release the 
hold on the feet, bring them 
together and relax. 





Yogasanas 79 


effects 

The a sana stretches the 
hamstrings and helps the blood 
to circulate properly in the pelvic 
region and keeps it healthy. It 
prevents the development of 
hernia of which it can core mild 
cases and relieves sciatic pains. 
Since the asana controls and 
regularizes the menstrual flow 
and also stimulates the ovaries, 
it is a boon to women. 


36 1 Paschimottdndsana 
( also called Ugrasana 

or 

Brahma ch a rydsa na) 

SIX* 

Paschirna literally means the west. It 
implies the back of the whole body from 
\he head to the heris. The anterior or 
eastern aspect is the front of the body 
from the face daztm to the toes. T/te 
crown of the head is the upper or 
northern aspect while the soles and 
heels of the feet form the lower or 
southern aspect of the body , In this 
asana the back of the whole body is 
intensely stretched, hence the name. 

Ugra means formidable, powerful 
and noble . Brahmacharya means 
religious study , self-restraint and 
celibacy. 

technique 

L Sit on the floor with the legs 
Stretched straight in front. Place 
the palms on the floor by the side 
of the hips. Take a few deep 
breaths. {Plate 35) 

2. Exhale, extend the hands and 
catch the toes. Hold the right big 
toe between the right thumb and 



4, Now exhale, bend and widen 
the elbows, using them as 
levers, pull the trunk forward 
and touch the forehead to the 
knees. (Plate 76) Gradually rest 
the elbows on the floor, stretch 
the neck and trunk, touch the 
knees with the nose and then 
with the lips. (Plate 77) 


the index and middle fingers and 
likewise the left big toe. (Plate 75) 


3. Extend the spine and try to 
keep the back concave. To start 
with the back will be like a hump. 
This is due to stretching the spine 
only from the area of the 
shoulders. Learn to bend right 
from the pelvic region of the back 
and also to extend the arms from 
the shoulders. Then the hump 
will disappear and the back will 
become flat as in Plate 75, 

Take a few deep 
breaths. 




Y ogasanas 81 


5* When this becomes easy, 
make a further effort to grip the 
soles and rest the chin on the 
knees. (Hate 78) 

6. When this also becomes easy, 
clasp the hands by interlocking 
the fingers and rest the chin on 
the shins beyond the knees. 

(Plate 79) 

7. When position 6 becomes 
easy, grip the right palm with the 
left hand or the left palm with the 
right hand beyond the 
outstretched feet exhale and rest 
the chin on the shins beyond the 
knees. (Plate SO) 

8. If position S also becomes 
easy, hold the right wrist with 
the left hand or the left wrist with 
the right hand and rest the chin 
on the shins beyond the knees. 
(Plate 81) 

9. See that the back of the legs at 
the knee joints rests firmly on the 
ground. In the initial stages the 
knees will be lifted off the floor. 
Tighten the muscles at the back 
of the thighs and pull the trunk 
forward. Then the back of the 
knee joints will rest on the floor. 


10. Try and stay in whichever of 
the above positions you can 
achieve from 1 to 5 minutes, 
breathing evenly* 

11* Inhale, raise the head from 
the knees and relax* 


EFFECTS 

This asana tones the abdominal 
organs and keeps them free from 
sluggishness* It also tones the 
kidneys, rejuvenates the whole 
spine and improves the 
digestion. 

The spines of animals are 
horizontal and their hearts and 
below the spine. This keeps them 
healthy and gives them great 
power of endurance. In humans 
the spine is vertical and the heart 
is not lower than the spine, so 
that they soon feel the effects of 
exertion and are also susceptible 
to the heart diseases. In 
Paschimottanasana the spine is 
kept straight and horizontal and 
the heart is at a lower level than 
the spine* A good stay in this pose 
massages the heart, the spinal 
column and the abdominal 
organs, which feel refreshed and 


the mind is rested* Due to the 
extra stretch given to the pelvic 
region more oxygenated blood is 
brought there and the gonad 
glands absorb the required 
nutrition from the blood* This 
increases vitality, helps to cure 
impotency and leads to sex 
control. Hence, this asana was 
called Brahmacharyasana. 
Brahmacharya means celibacy 
and a Brahmachari is one who 
has controlled the sex appetite. 




S2 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


37 1 Purvottdnasana 

ONE* 

Purva literally means the East. It 
means the front of the whole body from 
the forehead to the toes. Lit tana 
means an intense stretch . In this 
posture , the whole front of the body 
is stretched intensely. 

TECHNIQUE 

1, Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched straight in front. Place 
the palms on the floor by the 
hips, with the fingers pointing in 
the direction of the feet (Plate 35) 

2, Bend the knees and place the 
soles and heels on the floor. 

3, Take the pressure of the body 
on the hands and feet, exhale 
and lift the body off the floor. 
Straighten the arms and the legs 
and keep the knees and elbows 
tightened. (Plate 82) 


4. The arms will be 
perpendicular to the floor from 
the wrists to the shoulders. From 
the shoulders to the pelvis, the 
trunk will be parallel to the floor. 

5. Stretch the neck and throw the 
head as far back as possible, 

6. Stay in this posture for one 
minute, breathing normally. 

7. Exhale, bend the elbows and 
knees, lower the body to sit on the 
floor and relax. 

EFFECTS 

This posture strengthens the 
wrists and ankles, improves the 
movement of the shoulder joints 
and expands the chest fully, ft 
gives relief from the fatigue 
caused by doing other strenuous 
forward bending asanas. 


38| Salamba Sirsasana I 

FOUR * 

Salamba means with support. £ir$a 
means the head. This is the head 
stand pose , one of the most important 
Yogi asanas . It is the basic posture. 

It has several variations , which are 
described later as the £ir$dsana cycle. 
Us mastery gives one frafrmce and 
poise , both physically and mentally. 
The technique of doing it is given at 
length in two parts ; the first is for 
beginners , the second for those who 
can remain balanced in the pose. 
Attention is specially directed to the 
hints on iirsdsana given after the 
techniques. 



r 

technique for 
beginners 

1* Spread the blanket fourfold on 
the floor and kneel near it, 

2, Rest the forearms on the 
centre of the blanket. While 
doing so take care that the 
distance between the elbows on 
the floor is not wider than the 
shoulders, 

3. Interlock the fingers right up 
to the finger-tips (Plate 83), so that 
the palms form a cup. Place the 
sides of the palms near the little 
fingers on the blankets. While 
going up on to your head or 
balancing, the fingers should be 
kept tightly locked. If they are left 
loose, the weight of the body falls 
on them and the arms ache. So 
remember to lock them well. 







4, Rest the crown of the head 
only on the blanket, so that the 
back of the head touches the 
palms which are cupped. (Plate 
84) Do not rest the forehead nor 
the back but only the crown of the 
head on the blanket. To do this 
move the knees towards the 
head. 

5* After securing the head 
position, raise the knees from the 
floor by moving the toes closer to 
the head. (Plate 85) 


84 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 



6* Exhale, take a gentle swing 
from the floor and lift the legs off 
the ground with bent knees. Take 
the swing in such a way that both 
feet leave the floor 
simultaneously, to come to 
position as in Plate 86, When 
once this position is secured, 
follow the various stages of the 
leg movements as in Plates 87, 88 
and 89, step by step. 


7, Stretch the legs and stand on 
the head, keeping the whole body 
perpendicular to the floor, (Front 
view: Plate 90, Back view: Plate 91 . 
Side view: Plate 96) 


8- After staying in the final 
position to capacity, from one to 
five minutes, flex the knees and 
slide down to the floor in the 
reverse order as in Plates 89, 88, 
87, 86, 85, 84 and raise head from 
the floor. 


9. A beginner must have the 
assistance of a friend or do the 
asana against a wall. While 
practising against a wall, the 
distance between it and the head 
should not be more than 2 or 
3 inches. If the distance is greater, 
the spine will curve and the 
stomach will protrude. The 
weight of the body will be felt on 
the elbows and the position of the 
head may change. The face will 
appear to be flushed and the eyes 
either strained or puffed. It is, 
therefore, advisable for a 
beginner to do the head stand in 
a corner where two walls meet, 
placing the head some 2 to 
3 inches from either wall 


10, While doing the head stand 
against a wall or in a corner, the 
beginner should exhale, swing 
the legs up, support the hips 
against the side of the wall and 
move the feet up. In a corner, he 
can touch the heels to either side 
of the walls. He should then 
stretch the back vertically up, 
gradually leave the support of 
the wall and learn to master the 
balance. While coming down, he 
can rest the feet and hips against 
the wall, slide down and kneel, 
resting his knees on the floor. 

The movements of coming down 
and going up should be done 
with an exhalation. 

11, The advantage which the 
beginner has of balancing in a 
corner is that his head and legs 
will be in the right angle formed 
by the walls, and he will be sure 
of his right position. This will not 
be the case if he balances against 
a straight walk For while his 
balance is insecure he may sway 
hom the wall, or his body may 
tilt or swing to the stronger side, 
while his legs may rest against 
the wall with a bend either at the 
waist or the hips. The beginner 
will not be in a position to know 
that he has tilted to one side, 
much less to correct it. In time he 
may learn to balance on the 
head, but by habit his body may 
still tilt or his head may not be 
straight. It is as hard to correct a 90 
wrong pose in the head stand as 

it is to break a bad habit 
Moreover this wrong posture 
may well Lead to aches and pains 
in the head, neck, shoulders and 
back. But the two walls of a 
corner will help the beginner to 
keep the asana symmetrical. 



12. When once balance is 
secured, it is advisable to come 
down to the floor with the legs 
straight (that is, without bending 
the knees at all) and with a 
backward action of the hips. At 
first, it is not possible to go up 
and come down without bending 
the legs, but the correct method 
should be learnt. Once the 
beginner has confidence in the 
head stand, he will find it more 
beneficial to go up and down 
with the Legs together and 
straight, without any jerks. 

13. It takes time for the beginner 
to become oriented to his 
surroundings while he is 
balancing on his head. Everything 
will seen at first to be completely 
unfamiliar. The directions and 
instructions will appear 
confusing and he will find it an 
effort to think dearly or to act 
logically. This is due to fear of a 
fall. The best way to overcome 
fear is to face with equanimity the 
situation of which one is afraid. 
Then one gets the correct 
perspective, and one is not 
frightened any more. To topple 


over while learning the head 
stand is not as terrible as we 
imagine. If one overbalances, one 
should remember to loosen the 
interlocked fingers, relax, go limp 
and flex the knees. Then one will 
just roll over and smile. If the 
fingers are not loosened they will 
take the jerk of the fall which will 
be painful. If we do not relax and 
go limp while falling we hit the 
floor with a hard bump. If we flex 
the knees, we are unlikely to 
graze them in the fall. After one 
has leamt to balance against a 
wall or in a corner, one should 
try the head stand in the middle 
of the room. There will be a few 
spills and one must learn the art 
of falling as indicated above. 
Learning to do Slrsasana in the 
middle of a room gives the 
beginner more confidence. 


TECHNIQUE FOR THOSE 
WHO CAN BALANCE 
EIGHT* 

1- Follow the technique 
described for beginners from 
positions 1 to 4. 

2. After securing the head 
position, stretch the legs straight 
by raising the knees from the 
floor. Move the toes nearer to the 
head and try to press the heels to 
the floor, keeping the back erect, 
(Plate 92) 

3, Stretch the dorsal or middle 
region of the spine and stay in 
this position for about 30 seconds 
while breathing evenly. 

4. Exhale, raise the heels and 
take the toes off the floor with a 
backward movement of the hips. 
Raise both legs simultaneously, 
keeping them poker stiff. (Plate 
93) Take a breath. 

5, Again with an exhalation 
move the legs up until they are 
parallel to the floor. This position 
is called: 


Yogasanas 87 


39| Urdhva Dandasana 

eight* 

(Urdhva = up t dand = a staff) 

Stay in this position for 10 seconds 
with normal breathing. 

6. Exhale, move the legs up as in 
Hate 95, and then pull them up to 
the vertical position. (Side view. 
Plate 96) Stay in this pose from 

1 to 5 minutes while breathing 
evenly. 

7. Come down gradually, 
observing the above technique in 
a reverse order, (Plates 95, 94, 93 
and 92) Rest the feet on the floor, 
bend the knees (Plate 84} and 
raise the head from the floor or 
blanket. (Plate 83) 

8. While coming down, it is 
advisable to stay in Urdhva 
Dandasana according to capacity 
up to one minute while breathing 
normally. In this position, the 
neck and trunk will not be 
perpendicular to the floor but will 
sway slightly backwards. The 
neck, shoulders and spine will be 
put to a very great strain and in 
the initial stages one cannot stay 
with the legs parallel to the floor 
for more than a few seconds. The 
stay will become longer as the 
neck, shoulders, abdomen and 
spine become stronger. 


hints on £irsasana 

t In Sir$asana the balance alone 
is not important. One has to 
watch from moment to moment 
and find out the subtle 
adjustments. When we stand on 
our feet, we need no extra effort, 



strength or attention, for the 
position is natural. Yet the correct 
method of standing affects our 
bearing and carriage. It is, 
therefore, necessary to master the 
correct method as pointed out in 
the note on Tadasana. In 
Slrsasana also, the correct position 
should be mastered, as a faulty 
posture in this asana will lead to 
pains in the head, neck and back. 

2, The whole weight of the body 
should be borne on the head 
alone and not on the forearms 
and hands. The forearms and 
hands are to be used only for 
support to check any loss of 
balance. In a good pose you feel 
a circle, about the size of an Indian 
rupee, of the head in contact with 
the blanket on the floor. 


3* The back of the head, the 
trunk, the back of the thighs and 
the heels should be in a line 
perpendicular to the floor and 
not inclined to one side. The 
throat, chin and breast-bone 
should be in one line, otherwise 
the head will tilt to one side or 
move forward. As regards the 
interlocked hands behind the 
head, the palms should not be 
stuck into the head. The upper 
and the lower sides of the palms 
should be in a line, otherwise the 
crown of the head will not rest on 
the floor correctly. 

4. The elbows and the shoulders 
should be in a line and the 
elbows should not be widened. 
The shoulders should be kept as 
high above the floor as possible 


88 The Illustrated Light on Yop 


by moving them up and 
stretching them sideways. In 
order to learn the correct shoulder 
stretch, release the interlocked 
fingers and remove the hands 
from behind the head and widen 
the wrists from the forearms, 
keeping the elbows stationary. 
Place the wrists on the floor with 
the palms facing up, touch the 
shoulders with the fingers, 
keeping the wrists on the floor 
and maintain the balance. {Plate 
97) This will not only improve the 
balance but also prepare you for 
the other Sir^asana poses 
described later, 

5. As to the position of the trunk, 
the dorsal region should be 
pushed forward as well as up. 
The lumbar (waist) and pelvic 
regions should not be pushed 
forward, while the trunk from the 
shoulders to the pelvis should be 
kept perpendicular. If the pelvic 
area juts forward, it means that 
you are bearing the weight of the 
body not on the head alone but 
also on the elbows for you have 
not stretched the dorsal region 
(the chest) correctly. When 
viewed from the side, the body 
from the neck to the heels should 
appear straight. 

6, As far as possible try and join 
the thighs, knees, ankles and 
toes. Stretch the legs fully, 
especially the back of the knees 
and thighs. If the legs swing back 
tighten the knees and the lower 
median portion of the abdomen 
above the pubes. This will keep 
the legs perpendicular. Keep the 
toes pointing up. If the legs swing 
forward, stretch the dorsal region 
and push the pelvic area slightly 


back until it is in line with the 
shoulders. The body will then 
feel light and the pose will be 
exhilarating. 

7 . While going up or holding the 
head stand the eyes should never 
become bloodshot. If they do, the 
pose is faulty. * 

8. The time limit for Sir^asana 
depends upon individual 
capacity and the time at one's 
disposal. One can hold it 
comfortably from 10 to 15 
minutes. A beginner can do it for 
2 minutes and go up to 5 minutes. 
It is always difficult for a 
beginner to balance for one 
minute, but once he succeeds he 
can be sure that from then on he 
will be able to master ^trsasana 
soon. 

9. While going up or coming 
down, move both legs together, 
inch by inch. All the movements 
should be done with exhalation. 
Inhale while waiting in a 
position. The effect of going 
down and coming up straight 
without bending the legs at the 
knees is that harmonious slow 
movement is gained and the 
flow of blood to the head is 
controlled. The face does not flush 
from jerky and fast movements, 
as the flow of blood to the waist 
and the legs is also controlled. 


* I have taught this pose to a lady of 65 
who was suffering from glaucoma . Now 
she finds the eyes are completely rested 
and the pain in them is much lessened. 
Medical examination revealed that the 
tension in the eyeballs had decreased. 

1 am mentioning this to prove the value 
of the correct head stand. 


YogisaMtfS 89 



Then there is no danger of losing 
balance from giddiness or 
numbness of the feet when one 
stands up immediately after the 
head balance. In course of time 
the w r hole movement of going 
up, staying and coming down 
should become as effortless as 
possible. In a perfect 6lr§asana 
your body feels completely 
stretched and at the same time 
you experience a feeling of 
complete relaxation, 

10, It is always safe to perfect 
Sarvangasana (Plate 102) first 
before attempting £ir$asana. If 
the standing poses described 
earlier (Plates 1 to 16) and the 
various movements of 
Sarvangasana and Halasana 
(Plates 108 to 125) are mastered 
first, £ir$asana will come without 
much effort. If these elementary 
asanas have not been mastered, 
the period taken to learn 
Slr^asana will be longer, 

11 * After one has learnt to 
balance in Sir^asana, however, it 
is preferable to perform Sir^asana 
first before practising any other 
asana. This is because one cannot 
balance or hold the head stand if 
the body is exhausted by doing 
other poses or if the breathing 
becomes fast and shaky. Once 
the body is tired or the breathing 
is not free and easy, the body will 
shake and it will be difficult to 
maintain the balance. It is always 
better to do Sirsasana first when 
one is fresh. 

12, 6lr§asana should always be 
followed by Sarvangasana and its 
cycle. It has been observed that 
people who devote themselves to 


fer$asana alone without doing 
the Sarvangasana poses are apt to 
lose their temper over trifling 
things and become irritated 
quickly. The practice of 
Sarvangasana coupled with 
£ir$asana checks this trait. If 
Sarvangasana is the Mother, then 
£ir$asana may be regarded as the 
Father of all asanas. And just as 
both parents are necessary for 
peace and harmony in a home, so 
the practice of both these asanas 
is essential to keep the body 
healthy and the mind tranquil 
and peaceful, 

EFFECTS OF £ I R $ AS A N A 

The ancient books have called 
Sirsasana the king of all asanas 
and the reasons are not hard to 
find. When we are bom, 
normally the head comes out first 
and then the limbs. The skull 
encases the brain, which controls 
the nervous system and the 
organs of sense. The brain is the 
seat of intelligence, knowledge, 
discrimination, wisdom and 
power. It is the seat of Brahman, 
the soul, A country cannot 
prosper without a proper king or 
constitutional head to guide it; so 
also the human body cannot 
prosper without a healthy brain. 

The Bhagavad-Gfta says: 
'Harmony (sattva), mobility 
(rajas), inertia (tamas), such are 
the qualities, matter-born; they 
bind fast, O great armed one 
(Arjuna), the indestructible 
dweller in the body/ (Fourteenth 
Discourse, verse 5) All these 
qualities stem from the brain, and 
sometimes one quality prevails 
and sometimes the others. The 
head is the centre of sattvic 


90 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


qualities which control 
discrimination; the trunk of 
Rajasic qualities which control 
passion, emotion and actions; and 
the region below the diaphragm 
of tamasic qualities which control 
sensual pleasures like the 
enjoyment of food and drink, and 
the thrills and pleasures of sex. 

Regular practice of Str$asana 
makes healthy pure blood flow 
through the brain cells. This 
rejuvenates them so that 
thinking power increases and 
thoughts become dearer. The 
asana is a tonic for people whose 
brains tire quickly. It ensures a 
proper blood supply to the 


pituitary and pineal glands in the 
brain. Our growth, health and 
vitality depend on the proper 
functioning of these two glands. 

People suffering from loss of 
sleep, memory and vitality have 
recovered by the regular and 
correct practice of this asana and 
have become fountains of energy. 
The lungs gain the power to resist 
any climate and stand up to any 
work, which relieves one from 
colds, coughs, tonsillitis, halitosis 
(foul breath) and palpitations. It 
keeps the body warm. Coupled 
with Sarvangasana movements 
(Plates 108 to 125), it is a boon to 
people suffering from 


constipation. Regular practice of 
£ir$asana will show marked 
improvement in the haemoglobin 
content of the blood. 

It is not advisable to start with 
§Ir§asana and Sarvangasana when 
one suffers from high or low 
blood pressure. 

Regular and prerise practice of 
£ir$asana develops the body, 
disciplines the mind and widens 
the horizons of the spirit. One 
becomes balanced and self-reliant 
in pain and pleasure, loss and 
gain, shame and fame and defeat 
and victory. 



% 


40 1 Salamba 

Sarvangasana I 

TWO* 

Alamba means a prop t a support and 
sa together with or accompanied by. 
Salamba , therefore means supported 
or propped up. Sarvdnga (Sarva = 
all, whole , entire, complete; anga - 
limb or body) means the entire body 
or all the limbs. Jrc this pose the whole 
body benefits from the exercise , hence 
the name. 


TECHNIQUE FOR 
BEGINNERS 

1, Lie flat on the back of the 
carpet keeping the legs stretched 
out, tightened at the knees. Place 
the hands by the side of the legs, 
palms down. (Plate 98) Take a 
few deep breaths. 

2. Exhale, bend the knees and 
move the legs towards the 
stomach till the thighs press it. 
(Plate 99) Take two breaths. 


3. Raise the hips from the floor 
with an exhalation and rest the 
hands on them by bending the 
arms at the elbows. (Plate 200) 
Take two breaths. 

4. Exhale, raise the trunk up 
perpendicularly supported by 
the hands until the chest touches 
the chin. (Plate 101) 


Yogdsanas 91 



5, Only the back of the head and 
the neck, the shoulders and the 
backs of the arms up to the 
elbows should rest on the floor. 
Place the hands in the middle of 
the spine as in Plate 101. Take two 
breaths. 


6. Exhale and stretch the legs 
straight with the toes pointing up* 
(Front view: Plate 102* Back view: 
Plate 103) 

7. Stay in this position for 5 
minutes with even breathing. 


8* Exhale, gradually slide down, 
release the hands, lie flat and 
relax. 

9* If you cannot do the asana with- 
out support use a stool and follow 
the technique. See Plate 104. 



92 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 



TECHNIQUE FOR 
ADVANCED PUPILS 

1. Lie flat on the back on the 
carpet. 

2. Keep the legs stretched out, 
tightened at the knees. Place the 
hands by the side of the legs, 
palms down. (Plate 98) 

3. Take a few deep breaths. 
Exhale slowly and at the same 
time raise both legs together and 
bring them at a right angle to the 
body. (Plate 105) Remain in this 
position and inhale, keeping the 
legs steady. 

4. Exhale, again raise the legs 
further up by lifting the hips and 
back from the floor, pressing the 


palms gently against the floor as 
in Plate 106. 

5. When the whole trunk is 
raised off the ground, bend the 
elbows and place the palms on 
the back of the ribs, resting the 
shoulders well on the floor. 

6. Utilize the palm pressure and 
raise the trunk and legs up 
vertically as in Plate 107 so that 
the breast-bone presses the chin 
to form a firm chinlock. The 
contraction of the throat and 
pressing the chin against the 
breast-bone to form a firm 
chinlock is known as Jalandhara 
Bandha. Remember to bring the 
chest forward to touch the chin 
and not to bring the chin 


towards the chest. If the latter is 
done, the spine is not stretched 
completely and the full effect of 
this asana will not be felt. 

7. Only the back of the head and 
neck, the shoulders and the upper 
portion of the arms up to the 
elbows should rest well on the 
floor. The remainder of the body 
should be in one straight line, 
perpendicular to the floor. This ib 
the final position. (Side view: 
Plate 108) 

8. In the beginning, there is a 
tendency for the legs to swing 
out of the perpendicular. To 
correct this, tighten the back thigh 
muscles and stretch up vertically- 




Y ogasanas 


93 



9. The elbows should not be 
placed wider than the shoulders. 
Try and stretch the shoulders 
away from the neck and also to 
bring the elbows dose to each 
other. If the elbows are widened, 
the trunk cannot be pulled up 
properly and the pose will look 
imperfect. Also see that the neck 
is straight with the centre of the 
chin resting on the sternum. In 
the beginning, the neck moves 
sideways and if this is not 
corrected, it will cause pain and 
injure the neck. 



10. Remain in this pose for not 
less than 5 minutes. Gradually 
increase the time to 15 minutes; 
this will have no ill effects, 

11. Release the hands, slide 
to the floor, lie flat and relax. 

As the weight of the whole 
body is borne on the neck and 
shoulders and as the hands are 
used to support the weight this 
asana is called Salamba 
Sarvangasana. In Sarvangasana 
there are various movements 
which can be done in addition to 
the basic pose described above. 



107 


toa 


94 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


EFFECTS 

The importance of Sarvangasana 
cannot be over-emphasized. It is 
one of the greatest boons 
conferred on humanity by our 
ancient sages. Sarvangasana is 
the mother of asanas. As a mother 
strives for harmony and 
happiness in the home, so this 
asana strives for the harmony 
and happiness of the human 
system. It is a panacea for most 
common ailments. There are 
several endocrine organs or 
ductless glands in the human 
system which bathe in blood, 
absorb the nutriments from the 
blood and secrete hormones for 
the proper functioning of a 
balanced and well developed 
body and brain. If the glands fail 
to function properly, the 
hormones are not produced as 
they should be and the body 
starts to deteriorate. Amazingly 
enough many of the asanas have 
a direct effect on the glands and 
help them to function properly. 
Sarvangasana does this for the 
thyroid and parathyroid glands 
which are situated in the neck 
region, since due to the firm 
chinlock their blood supply is 
increased. Further, since the 
body is inverted the venous 
blood flows to the heart without 
any strain by force of gravity. 
Healthy blood is allowed to 
circulate around the neck and 
chest. As a result, persons 
suffering from breathlessness, 
palpitation, asthma, bronchitis 
and throat ailments get relief. As 
the head remains firm in this 
inverted position, and the 
supply of the blood to it is 
regulated by the firm chinlock. 


the nerves are soothed and 
headaches - even chronic ones - 
disappear. Continued practice of 
this asana eradicates common 
colds and other nasal 
disturbances. Due to the 
soothing effect of the pose on 
the nerves, those suffering from 
hypertension, irritation, 
shortness of temper, nervous 
breakdown and insomnia are 
relieved. The change in bodily 
gravity also affects the abdominal 
organs so that the bowels move 
freely and constipation vanishes. 
As a result the system is freed 
from toxins and one feels full of 
energy. The asana is 
recommended for urinary 
disorders and uterine 
displacement, menstrual 
trouble, piles and hernia. It also 
helps to relieve epilepsy, low 
vitality and anaemia. It is no 
over-statement to say that if a 
person regularly practises 
Sarvangasana he will feel new 
vigour and strength, and will be 
happy and confident. New life 
will flow into him, his mind will 
be at peace and he will feel the 
joy of life. After a long illness, the 
practice of this asana regularly 
twice a day brings back lost 
vitality. The Sarvangasana cycle 
activates the abdominal organs 
and relieves people suffering from 
stomach and intestinal ulcers, 
severe pains in the abdomen and 
colitis. 

People suffering from high 
blood pressure should not 
attempt Salamba Sarvangasana 
unless they do Halasana (Plate 
113) first and can stay in it for not 
less than 3 minutes. 

Do not perform Sarvangasana 
during menstruation. 


Halasana is described on the 
following pages. 

THE SARVANGASANA 
CYCLE 

These various movements can be 
practised at one stretch after 
staying in Sarvangasana (Plate 
102) from 5 to 10 minutes or more 
according to capacity; do them for 
20 to 30 seconds at a time each 
side except Halasana, which 
should last from 3 to 5 minutes at 
a stretch. 



3. Tighten the knees by pulling 
up the hamstring muscles at the 
back of the thighs and raise the 
trunk. (Plate 110) 


2 , Release the chinlock, lower 
the trunk slightly, moving the 
arms and legs over the head and 
resting the toes on the floor 
(Plate 109) 


4 . Stretch the arms on the floor 
in the direction opposite to that 
of the legs. (Plate 111) 


41 1 Halasana 

FOUR* 


Mala means a plough, the shape of 
which this posture resembles , hence 
the name. It is a part of Sarvdngdsam l 
and a continuation thereof. 


technique 


1* Do Salamba Sarvangasana 
(Plate 103) with a firm chinlock. 


m 




1 

96 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

5. Interlock the fingers (Plate maintain the position for a 9. In the beginning it is also 

112 ) and turn the wrists so that minute. Then release the grip difficult to keep the toes firmly on 

the thumbs rest on the floor. and bring the left thumb first on the floor behind the head. If you 

(Plate 113 ) Stretch the palms the floor, follow the interlock, lengthen the timing and stretch 

along with the fingers, tighten finger by finger, and stretch out of Sarvangasana (Plate 102 ) 

the arms at the elbows and pull the arms for the same length of before going into Halasana, the 

them from the shoulders. time. This will lead to toes will remain longer on the 

harmonious development and floor. 

6. The legs and the hands are elasticity of both the shoulders, 

stretched in opposite directions elbows and wrists. 10. Remain in the attainable pose 

and this stretches the spine from one to five minutes with 

completely. 8. In the beginning interlocking normal breathing. 

will be difficult. By gradual 

7. While interlocking the fingers, practice of the above mentioned 11. Release the hands. Raise the 

it is advisable to change the positions, you will interlock the legs up to Sarvangasana and 

interlock. Suppose that the right fingers easily. gradually slide down to the floor, 

thumb touches the floor first. Lie flat on the back and relax. 



113 


Yogasanas 97 


effects 

The effect of Halasana is the same 
as that of Sarvangasana. (Plate 
102} In addition, the abdominal 
organs are rejuvenated due to 
contraction. The spine receives 
an extra supply of blood due to 
the forward bend and this helps 
to relieve backache. Cramps in 
the hands are cured by 
interlocking and stretching the 
palms and fingers. People 
suffering from stiff shoulders 
and elbows, lumbago and 
arthritis of the back find relief in 
this asana. Griping pain in the 
stomach due to wind is also 
relieved and lightness is felt 
immediately. 

The pose is good for people 
with a tendency for high blood 
pressure. If they perform 
Halasana first and then 
Sarvangasana, they will not feel 
the rush of blood or the sensation 
of fullness in the head, 

Halasana is a preparatory pose 
to Paschimottanasana, (Plate 81) 
If one improves in Halasana, the 
resulting mobility of the back 
will enable one to perform 
Paschimottanasana well* 


NOTE 

For persons suffering from high 
blood pressure the following 
technique is recommended for 
doing Halasana before they 
attempt Salamba Sarvangasana, 

I, Lie flat on the back on the 
floor. 

2* Exhale, slowly raise the legs to 
a perpendicular position and stay 
there breathing normally for 
about 10 seconds, 

3, Exhale, bring the legs over and 
beyond the head and touch the 
toes on the floor. Keep the toes 
on the floor and the legs stiff at 
the knees* 

4, If you have difficulty in 
keeping the toes on the floor, 
then place a chair or a stool 
behind the head and rest the toes 
on it. 

5, If the breathing becomes 
heavy or fast do not rest the toes 
on the floor, but on a stool or 
chair. Then fullness or pressure 
is not felt in the head * 


6* Extend the arms over the 
head, keep them on the floor and 
stay in this position with normal 
breathing for 3 minutes, 

7* Throughout the asana, gaze at 
the tip of the nose with the eyes 
shut. 


98 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


42 1 Kamapidasana 

ONE* 

Kama means the ear. Phia means 
pain, discomfort or pressure. This is 
a variant of Haldsana and can be done 
along with it. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Do Halasana (Plate 113) and 
after completing the time limit 
for that pose, flex the knees and 
rest the right knee by the side of 
the right ear and the left knee by 
the side of the left. 

2. Both knees should rest on the 
floor, pressing the ears. 

3. Keep the toes stretched out 
and join the heels and toes. Rest 
the hands either on the back of 
the ribs (Plate 114a), or 
interlock the fingers and stretch 
out the arms (Plate 114b). 

4. Remain in this position for half 
a minute or a minute with normal 
breathing. 




EFFECTS 

This asana rests the trunk, heart 
and legs. The spine is stretched 
more while bending the knees, 
and this helps the circulation of 
blood round the waistline. 


Yogasflnas 99 


43 1 Supta Kondsana 

TWO* 

Supta means lying down and kona an 
angle. It is a variation of Haldsana 
in which the legs are spread apart. 

technique 

1. From Kama plda Sana (Plates 
114a, 114b), stretch the legs 
straight and spread the legs as far 
apart as you can. 


2. Pull the trunk up and tighten 
the knees. 

3. Hold the right toe with the 
right hand and the left toe with 
the left one. Keep the heels up. 
After gripping the toes, move the 
dorsal region of the spine still 
further up and extend the 
hamstring muscles. (Plate 115). 

4. Stay in the pose from 20 to 30 
seconds with normal breathing. 


EFFECTS 

This pose tones the legs and 
helps to contract the abdominal 
organs. 



44 i Parsva Halasana 

FOUR* 

In Haldsana (Plate 114) both the legs 
rest behind the head. In this pose 
thcx/ rest sideways on one side of and 
in line with the head. This is the 
lateral plough pose. 


palms and stretch the legs. 

(Plate 116) 

5. Remain in this position for half 
a minute with normal breathing. 

6. Exhale, move the legs to the 
right until they are in line with 


the head and hold the pose for 
half a minute. Do not disturb the 
position of the chest and trunk 
when the legs are moved. The 
chest and trunk should remain as 
in Sarvangasana or Halasana. 


TECHNIQUE 

1. Do Supta Konasana (Plate 115) 
and come back to Halasana. 

2. Place the palms on the back of 
the ribs. 

3. Move both the legs as far as 
you can to the left. 

4. Tighten both knees, raise the 
trunk up with the help of the 



100 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


effects 

In this asana, the spine moves 
laterally and becomes more 
elastic. The colon, which is 
inverted during the movements, 
is exercised properly and 
elimination will be complete. 
People suffering from acute or 
chronic constipation which is the 
mother of several diseases derive 
great benefit from this asana , If 
rubbish is dumped outside our 
house we feel sick. How much 
more so when waste matter 
which creates toxins is allowed 
to accumulate in our own 
system? If this waste matter is not 
eliminated, diseases will enter 
the body like thieves and rob us 
of health. If the bowels do not 
move freely, the mind becomes 
dull and one feels heavy and 
irritable. This asana helps us keep 
the bowels free and thereby win 
the prize of health. 


45 1 Eka Pada 
Sarvangdsana 

FIVE* 

Eka means one f single. Pada means 
the foot , In this variation of 
Sarvangdsana , one leg is on the floor 
in Halasana, white the other is in a 
vertical position along with the 
trunk. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Do Salamba Sarvangasana L 
(Plate 102) 

2, Keep the left leg up in 
Sarvangasana. Exhale and move 
the right leg down to the floor to 
Halasana, (Plate 117) It should 


remain stiff and straight and not 
bend at the knee. If it is not 
possible to touch the floor, lower 
the leg as far as possible. 

3, While resting the right leg on 
the floor, the left knee should be 
kept taut and not allowed to tilt 
sideways. The left leg should be 
kept straight, facing the head. 


6, Stay on this side for the same 
length of time. 

EFFECTS 

This asana tones the kidneys and 
the leg muscles. 


4. Stay in the pose for 20 seconds 
maintaining normal breathing. 



5. Exhale, lift the right leg back 
to Sarvangasana, and then move 
the left leg down to the floor in 
Halasana, keeping the right leg 
vertically up and stiff. Lifting the 
leg from the floor back to 
Sarvangasana exercises the 
abdominal organs more than if 
one brings both legs down to 
Halasana, 


46) Parsvaika Pada 
Sarvangasana 

SIX* 

P$r§va means the side * In Eka Pada 
Sarvangasana (Plate 117) the lower 
leg rests behind the head , whereas 
here it rests sideways in line with the 
trunk t 


technique 

1. Perform Eka Pada 
Sarvangasana on both sides as 
described above and come back 
to Sarvangasana. 

2. Exhale, move the right leg 
down sideways to the floor until 
it is in line with the trunk, (Plate 
118) Keep the right leg straight 
and stiff and do not bend it at the 
knee. If it is not possible to touch 
the floor, lower the leg as far as 
possible. 

3. The left leg which is vertically 
up should be kept straight and not 
allowed to tilt to the right. The 
ribs should be lifted with the 
palms to expand the chest fully. 

4. Remain in the pose for 20 
seconds with normal breathing, 
exhale, and go back to 
Sarvangasana. Repeat with the 
other leg for the same length of 
time and return to Sarvangasana, 


effects 

This pose relieves constipation 
and also tones the kidneys. 


102 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


47| Setu Bandha 

Sarvangdsana (also 
called Uttdna 
Mayurdsana) 

TEN* 

Sch* means a bridge and Sehf Bandha 
means the formation or construction 
of a bridge . In this position, the body 
is arched and supported on the 
shoulders , soles arid heels. The arch 
is supported by the hands at the waist. 

lit means intense and tan means 
to stretch . This dsana resembles a 
stretched peacock (Mayurn), hence 
the name . 

TECHNIQUE 



1, Do Salamba Sarvangasana. 
{Plate 202) 


119 


2. Rest the palms well on the 
back, raise the spine up, bend 
the knees (Plate 119) and throw 
the legs back over the wrists to 
the floor. (Plate 120) Stretch out 
the legs and keep them together. 
(Plate 121) 

3. The whole body forms a 
bridge, the weight of which is 
borne by the elbow r s and the 
wrists. The only parts of the 
body in contact with the ground 
will be the back of the head and 
neck, the shoulders, the elbows 
and the feet. Stay in the pose 
from half a minute to a minute 
with normal breathing. 

4. It is possible to lessen the 
pressure on the elbows and the 
wrists by stretching the spine 
towards the neck, keeping the 
heels firmly on the ground. 



f 


■ 


Yogdsan as ub 


effects 

This asana gives the spine a 
backward movement and 
removes the strain on the neck 
caused by the other various 
movements of Sarvangasana, 

A healthy and flexible spine 
indicates a healthy nervous 
system. If the nerves are healthy 
a man is sound in mind and 
body. 


48| Urdhva Padmasana 
in Sarvangasana 

FOUR* 

Urdhva means above, high. Padma 
means a lotus. In flu's Sarutfngasflna 
variation , flic legs, instead of being 
kept straight up, are bent at flic 
knees and crossed so that the right 
foot rests on the left thigh and the 
left foot on the right thigh as in the 
lotus pose , (Plate 53) 

TECHNIQUE 

1. From Saiamba Sarvangasana, 
bend the legs at the knees and 
cross them. First place the right 
foot over the left thigh, and then 
the left foot over the right thigh. 

2. Stretch the crossed legs 
vertically up, move the knees 
doser to each other and the legs 
as far back as possible from the 
pelvic region. (Plate 122) 

3. Stay in this pose from 20 to 30 
seconds with deep and even 
breathing. 



122 


4. Uncross the legs, return to 
Salamba Sarvangasana and repeat 
the pose by first placing the left 
foot over the right thigh and then 
the right foot over the left thigh. 
Stay for an equal length of time 
in all these positions as in the 
earlier ones. 


49] Pindasana in 
Sarvangasana 

FIVE* 

Pinda means embryo or foetus. In 
this variation of Sarvangasana 
which is a continuation of the earlier 
posture, the bent crossed legs are 
brought down wnfi'J they rest on the 
head. The posture resembles that of 
an embryo in the womb, hence the 
name. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. From Urdhva Padmasana in 
Sarvangasana (Plate 122), 
exhale, bend and lower the 
crossed legs from the hips 
towards the head. 

2. Rest the legs over the head, 
(Plate 123) 

3. Remain in this position from 
20 to 30 seconds with normal 
breathing and go back to Urdhva 
Padmasana in Sarvangasana, 









123 


L04 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 



50 1 Pdrsva Pittdasana in 
Sarvdngdsana 

EIGHT * 

Pdrgva means the side or flank. In 
this Pindasam variation of the 
earlier pose , both the bent knees are 
moved sideways and placed on the 
floor on the same side of the trunk * 
This is the lateral embryo pose in 
Sarvdngdsana. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. After staying in Findasana 
(Plate 123) turn the hips sideways 
to the right, exhale and lower 
both knees to the floor. The left 
knee should be by the side of the 
right ear, (Plate 124) 

2. The left shoulder will be raised 
off the floor in the beginning. 
Push the shoulder against the 
floor and press the left hand 
firmly against the back. If this is 
not done, you will lose balance 
and roll over to one side. 

3* Due to the lateral twist, 
breathing will be fast and difficult 
as the diaphragm is pressed in 
this position. 

4. The knee near the ear will not 
rest on the floor to start with, but 
only after long practice. 

5. Stay in this position for 20 to 
30 seconds, with normal 
breathing, 

6* Exhale, come up from the 
right side and move the crossed 
legs over to the left, so that the 
left foot will be near the left ear. 
(Plate 125) Stay here also for the 
same length of time. 


7. Go back to Ordhva 
Padmasana, (Plate 122) Release 
the lotus pose by uncrossing the 
legs and return to Salamba 
Sarvangasana. 

8, Now change the position of the 
crossed legs. Cross the legs again 


by putting the left foot over the 
right thigh first and then the right 
foot over the left thigh instead of 
the other way as done earlier. 

9. Repeat the movements again 
on both the sides as described 
earlier. 


Yogasanas 105 


effects of urdhva 

PADMASANA AND PAR$VA 
PIN DAS AN A MOVEMENTS 
IN SARVANGASANA 

The change of crossing the legs 
brings equal pressure on both 
sides of the abdomen and colon 
and relieves constipation. For 
those suffering from chronic 
constipation a longer stay in 
ParSva Pindasana is 
recommended, and one minute 
on each side will prove most 
efficacious. Griping pain in the 
stomach is relieved by these 
poses. 

Persons with extremely flexible 
knees, can easily perform these 
positions. It is, however, difficult 
for many people to cross the legs 
in Padmasana. For them a longer 
stay in ParSva Halasana (Plate 116) 
- (there also the spine and trunk 
get a lateral twist but the legs 
remain straight) - is 
recommended. 

In all these positions breathing 
at first will be fast and laboured. 
Try to maintain normal 
breathing. 


NOTE 

The spine is given the forward, 
lateral and backward 
movements in these variations of 
Sarvangasana. In Halasana, Eka 
Pada Sarvangasana, Kama 
PIdasana and Pindasana the 
spine moves in the forward 
direction. In ParSvaika Pada 
Sarvanga, Par£va Halasana and 
ParSva Pindasana the spine 
moves laterally. In Setu Bandha 
it is given a backward 
movement. These movements 
tone the spine on all sides and 
keep it healthy. 

It is related that in the Krita 
Age (the first Age of the Universe) 
a host of Danavas (giants and 
demons) became invincible in 
battle under the leadership of 
Vj-tra and scattered the Devas (or 
Gods) in all directions. Realizing 
that they could not regain their 
power until Vrtra was destroyed, 
the gods appeared before their 
Grandsire, Brahma, the creator. 
Brahma instructed them to 
consult Vi$nu who asked them to 


obtain the bones of a sage called 
Dadhicha, from which to make a 
demon-slaying weapon. The 
gods appeared before the sage 
and begged the boon according 
to Vi§nu's advice. The sage 
renounced his body for the 
benefit of the gods. From the 
spine of Dadhicha was fashioned 
Vajra, the thunderbolt, which 
Indra the king of the gods hurled 
and slew Vrtra. 

The story is symbolical. The 
Danavas represent the tamasic 
qualities in men and diseases. 

The Devas represent health, 
harmony and peace. To destroy 
the tamasic qualities and the 
diseases due to them and to enjoy 
health and happiness, we have 
to make our spines strong as a 
thunderbolt like the spine of 
Dadhicha. Then we shall enjoy 
health, harmony and happiness in 
abundance. 


106 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


51 1 Jatara 

Parivartandsana 

FIVE* 

jatara means the stomach , the belly. 
Parivartana means turning or 
rolling about , turning round . 

TECHNIQUE 

1, Lie flat on the back on the 
floor. (Plate 98) 

2, Exhale, raise both legs 
together until they are 
perpendicular to the floor. They 
should remain poker stiff, so do 
not bend them at the knees. 

(Plate 105) 

3* Stretch out both arms 
sideways in line with the 
shoulders, so that the body 
resembles a cross. 

4. Remain in this position for a 
few breaths. Then exhale,, and 
move both the legs sideways 
(Plate 126) down towards the 
floor to the left until the toes of 
the left foot almost touch the 
finger-tips of the outstretched left 
hand. (Plate 127) Try and keep the 
back well on the floor. In the 
initial stages, the right shoulder 
will be lifted off the floor. To 
prevent this ask a friend to press 
it down, or catch hold of a heavy 
piece of furniture with the right 
hand when the legs are turned 
sideways to the left. 



Yogdsatias 107 



5, Both legs should go down 
together, the knees being kept 
tight throughout. As far as 
possible keep the lumbar portion 
of the back on the floor and turn 
the legs only from the hips. 

When the legs are near the 
outstretched left hand, move the 
abdomen to the right. 

6, Stay in the pose for about 20 
seconds, keeping the legs stiff 
throughout. Then move the still 
stiffened legs slowly back to the 
perpendicular with an 
exhalation* 

7* Remain with the legs 
perpendicular for a few breaths 
and then repeat the movements 
by lowering the legs to the right 
and turning the abdomen to the 
left. (Plate 123) Stay here also for 
the same length of time and with 
an exhalation, come back to the 
perpendicular legs position and 
then gently lower the legs to the 
floor (Plate 93) and relax* 

EFFECTS 

This a Sana is good for reducing 
excess fat. It tones and eradicates 
sluggishness of the liver, spleen 
and pancreas* It also cures 
gastritis and strengthens the 
intestines. By its regular practice 
all the abdominal organs are kept 
in trim. It helps to relieve sprains 
and catches in the lower back and 
the hip region. 





108 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


52| Supta 

Padangusth asana 

THIRTEEN* 

Swpfrt means lying down. Pdda is the 
foot * Angustha means the big toe. 
Hence the name . 

TECHNIQUE 

X, Lie flat on the back, stretch 
both legs and keep the knees 
tight, (Plate 98) 

2* Inhale, raise the left leg from 
the floor until it is perpendicular. 
Keep the right leg stretched fully 
on the floor and rest the right 
hand on the right thigh. 


3, Raise the left arm and catch 
the left big toe between the 
thumb and the fore and middle 
fingers* (Plate 129) Take 3 or 4 
deep breaths. 

4* Exhale, raise the head and 
trunk from the floor, bend the 
left arm at the elbow and pull the 
left leg towards the head without 
bending it at the knee. Pull the 
leg down, lift the head and trunk 
up together and rest the chin on 
the left knee, (Plate 130) Stay in 
this position for about 20 
seconds, keeping the right leg 
fully stretched straight along the 
floor while breathing normally* 


5. Inhale, move the head and 
trunk back to the floor and the left 
leg back to the perpendicular* 
(Plate 129) This completes the first 
movement, 

6* Exhale, release the toe grip, 
rest the left leg on the floor beside 
the right one and keep the left 
hand on the left thigh. 

7* Take a few deep inhalations 
and then repeat on the right, 
substituting the word 'left" for the 
word 'right'. 

EFFECTS 

The legs will develop properly by 
the practice of this asana* 

Persons suffering from sciatica 
and paralysis of the legs wiU 
derive great benefit from it The 
blood is made to circulate in the 
legs and hips where the nerves 
are rejuvenated. The pose 
removes stiffness in the hip joints 
and prevents hernia. It can be 
practised by both men and 
women. 




130 


YogflStftttfS 109 



53 1 Bharadvajasana 

ONE* 

Bharadvdja was the father of Droria, 
the military preceptor of the 
Kauravas and Pandavas, who fought 
the great war described in the 
Mahabharata. This dsana is dedicated 
to Bharadvdja, 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched straight in front, 

(Plate 35) 

2. Flex the knees, move the legs 
back and bring both feet to the 
right side beside the hip. 

3. Rest the buttocks on the floor, 
turn the trunk about 45 degrees 
to the left, straighten the right 
arm and place the right hand on 
the outer side of the left thigh 
near the left knee. Insert the right 


hand underneath the left knee, 
the palm touching the floor. 

4. Exhale, turn the left arm from 
the shoulder behind the back, 
bend the left elbow and with the 
left hand clasp the right upper 
arm above the right elbow. 

5* Turn the neck to the right and 
gaze over the right shoulder. 
(Plates 131 and 132) 

6. Hold the position for half a 
minute with deep breathing, 

7. Loosen the hand grip, 
straighten the legs and repeat the 
pose on the other side* Here, 
bring both the feet beside the left 
hip, turn the trunk to the right, 
straighten the left arm, place the 
left palm underneath the right 
knee and catch the left upper arm 
near the elbow with the right 


hand from behind the back. Stay 
there for an equal length of time, 

effects 

This simple asana works on the 
dorsal and lumbar regions of the 
spine. People with very stiff 
backs find the other lateral 
twisting positions extremely 
difficult. This pose helps to make 
the back supple. People with 
arthritis will find it very beneficial. 


no The Illustrated Light on Yoga 




54 1 Martchxjasana II 

TEN* 

This is one of the sitting lateral 
twisting postures. 

TECHNIQUE 

1* Sit on the floor with the legs 
stretched straight in front. 

(Plate 35) 

2. Bend the left knee, place the 
sole and heel of the left foot flat 
on the floor. The shin of the left 
leg should be perpendicular to the 
floor and the calf should touch 
the thigh. Place the left heel near 
the perineum. The inner side of 
the left foot should touch the 
inner side of the outstretched 
right thigh. 

3. With an exhalation, turn the 
spine about 90 degrees to the 
left, so that the chest goes beyond 
the bent left thigh and bring the 
right arm over the left thigh. 
(Plate 133) 

4. Place the right shoulder 
beyond the left knee and stretch 
the right arm out forwards by 
turning the spine still more to 
the left and stretching the region 
at the back of the right floating 
ribs. (Plate 134) Take two breaths. 

5. With an exhalation, twist the 
right arm round the left knee, flex 
the right elbow and place the 
right wrist at the back of the 
waist. Inhale and hold the pose. 

6. Exhale deeply and turn the left 
arm from the shoulder behind 
the back. Either clasp the left 
hand behind the back with the 



right hand or vice versa. (Plates 
135 and 136) In the beginning, 
one finds it difficult to twist the 
trunk sideways, but with 
practice, the armpit touches the 
bent knee. After one has twisted 
the arm round the knee, one also 
finds it difficult to clasp the fingers 
of one hand with the other. 
Gradually one learns to clasp the 
fingers, then the palm and lastly 
to hold the hand at the wrist 
behind the back. 

7. The right arm should lock the 
left bent knee tightly. There 
should be no space between the 
right armpit and the bent left 
knee. 


8. After clasping the hands at the 
back, turn the spine still more to 
the left by tugging at the dasped 
hands. 

9, The whole of the outstretched 
right leg should remain straight 
and securely on the floor, but you 
wi 11 not be able to achieve this to 
start with. Tighten the muscles of 
the outstretched thigh so that the 
knee-cap is pulled up towards the 
thigh and also tighten the 
muscles of the calf of the 
outstretched leg. Then the leg will 
remain firm and extend on the 
floor. 


1 


Yogasflnas in 



10. Slay in this position from half 
a minute to a minute with normal 
breathing. The neck may be 
turned either way to gaze at the 
toes of the extended leg on the 
floor or to look over the 
shoulder. 

11. Unclasp the hands at the 
back and turn the trunk back to its 
original position. Lower the bent 
leg and extend it fully on the 
floor. 

12. Then repeat the pose on the 
other side. This time bend the 
right knee and place the right foot 
firmly on the floor so that the 
right heel touches the perineum 
and the inner side of the right 
foot touches the outstretched left 
thigh. Turn the trunk about 90 
degrees to the right so that the 
left armpit touches the bent right 
knee. With an exhalation, twist 
the left arm round the right knee 
and bring the left hand to the 
back of the waist. Then throw the 
right arm behind the back from 
the shoulder and flexing the right 
elbow, bring the right hand to the 
left hand and clasp them. Turn 




still more to the right and gaze at 
either the toes of the 
outstretched left leg or over the 
right shoulder. Stay on this side 
also for the same length of time. 
Unclasp the hands, turn the 
trunk back to normal, stretch the 
right leg on the floor and relax. 

EFFECTS 

By the regular practice of this 
asana, splitting backaches, 
lumbago and pains in the hips 
disappear rapidly. The liver and 


the spleen are contracted and so 
are toned and cease to be 
sluggish. The muscles of the neck 
gain power. Sprains in the 
shoulder and displacement of the 
shoulder joints are relieved and 
the shoulder movements become 
free. The intestines also benefit 
from this asana. Its effects w ill be 
less on lean persons, for whom 
there are better poses described 
later. It also helps to reduce the 
size of the abdomen. 


112 


The Illustrated Light on Yo^a 




55 ( Ardha 
Matsyendrdsana 

eight* 


Ardha means half \ In the Hatha 
Yoga Pradipika, Matsyendra is 
mentioned as one of the founders of 
Hatha Vidyd. It is related that once 
Lord Siva went to a lonely island and 
explained to his consort Parent i the 
mysteries of Yoga. A fish near the 
shore heard everything with 
concentration and remained 
motionless while listening ♦ Siva, 
realizing that the fish had learnt 
Yoga , sprinkled water upon it , a>ui 
immediately the fish gained divine 
form and became Matsyendra (Lord of 
the Fishes) and thereafter spread the 
knowledge of Yoga. 

TECHNIQUE 

1* Sit on the floor, with the legs 
stretched straight in front, 

(Plate 35) 

2 * Bend the left knee and join the 
thigh and calf; raise the seat from 
the floor, place the left foot under 
the buttocks and sit on the left foot 
so that the left heel rests under 
the left buttock. The foot used as 
the seat should be kept horizontal 
on the floor, the outer side of the 
ankle and the little toe of the foot 
resting on the ground. If the foot 
is not so placed, it will be 
impossible to sit on it. Balance 
securely in this position. 

3. Then bend the right knee and 
lifting the right leg from the 
floor, place it by the outer side of 
the left thigh so that the outer side 


of the right ankle touches the 
outer side of the left thigh on the 
floor. Balance in this position, 
keeping the right shin 
perpendicular to the floor. {Plate 
137) 

4. Turn the trunk 90 degrees to 
the right until the left armpit 
touches the outer side of the right 
thigh. Bring the armpit over the 
right knee. (Plate 138) Exhale, 
stretch the left arm from the 
shoulder and twist it round the 
right knee. Bend the left elbow 
and move the left wrist to the 
back of the waist. 



137 



5. The left arm should lock the 
bent right knee tightly and there 
should be no space between the 
left armpit and the bent right 
knee. To achieve this, exhale and 
move the trunk forward. Stay in 
this position and take 2 breaths. 

6. Now exhale deeply and swing 
back the right arm from the 
shoulder, bend the right elbow, 
move the right hand behind the 
waist and either clasp it with the 
left hand or vice versa. At first you 
will be able to catch a finger or 
two. With practice it will be 
possible to catch the palms and 
then the wrists behind the back. 

7. The neck may be turned to the 
left and the gaze directed over the 
left shoulder (Plate 139), or to the 
right, and the gaze fixed at the 
centre of the eyebrows. (Plate 
140) The spinal twist will be 
greater if the neck is turned to the 
left than when to the right. 

8. As the diaphragm is squeezed 
by the spinal twist, the breathing 
will at first become short and fast. 
Do not be nervous. After some 
practice the pose can be held 
from half a minute to a minute 
with normal breathing. 

9. Release the hands, remove the 
right foot from the floor and 
straighten the right and then the 
left leg. 

10. Repeat the pose on the other 
side and hold it for the same 
length of time. Here, bend the 
right leg and sit on the right foot 
so that the right heel is under the 
right buttock. Place the left leg 
over the right leg and rest the left 


foot on the floor so that the outer 
side of the left ankle touches the 
outer side of the right thigh on the 
floor. Turn the trunk 90 degrees 
to the left, placing the right armpit 
over the left knee and twist the 
right arm round the left knee. 

Flex the right elbow and move the 
right hand behind the waist. 

Hold the pose and take 2 breaths. 
Again exhale completely and 
swing the left arm back from the 
shoulder, bend the left elbow and 
clasp the hands behind the back at 
the wrist. Then release and relax. 

11. In the beginning it may not 
be possible to twist either arm 
round the opposite knee. In that 
case try and hold the opposite 
foot, keeping the arm straight at 
the elbow. It also takes time to 
clasp the hands behind the back. 
Gradually, the backward stretch 
of the arms will increase, and one 
will be able to catch at first the 
fingers, next the palms, then the 
wrist and as the pose is mastered 
even the forearms above the 
wrists. Beginners who find it 
difficult to sit on the foot can sit 
on the floor. 

EFFECTS 

By the practice of this asana, one 
derives the benefits mentioned 
under Marichyasana III. (Posture 
54 and Plate 135) But here as the 
range of movement is more 
intensified, the effects will also 
be greater. In Marichyasana III 
the upper part of the abdomen 
is squeezed. Here the lower part 
of the abdomen has the benefit of 
the exercise. The prostate and 
bladder are not enlarged if one 
practises regularly. 


114 The Illustrated light on Yoga 


56 1 Urdhva Dhanurasana 

SEVEN* 

Urdhva means upumrds. Dhamt 
means a how. In this posture the 
body is arched back and supported on 
the palms and soles. 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Lie flat on the back on the 
floor. (Plate 48) 


2. Bend and raise the elbows 
over the head, and place the 
palms under the shoulders. The 
distance between the palms 
should not be wider than the 
shoulders and the fingers should 
point towards the feet. 

3. Bend and raise the knees, then 
bring the feet nearer until they 
touch the hips. {Plate 141) 

4. Exhale, raise the trunk and 
rest the crown of the head on the 
floor. (Plate 142) Take two 
breaths. 


5. Now exhale, lift the trunk and 
head and arch the back so that its 
weight is taken on the palms and 
the soles. (Plate 143) 

6. Stretch the arms from the 
shoulders until the elbows are 
straightened, at the same time 
pulling the thigh muscles up. 
(Plate 144) 

7 . To get a better stretch, exhale 
and pull the thigh muscles still 
higher by lifting the heels off the 
floor. (Plate 145) Extend the 
chest, stretch up the sacral region 
of the spine until the abdomen 

is taut as a drum and then lower 
the heels to the floor, maintaining 
the stretch of the spine. 

8. Remain in this position from 
half a minute to a minute, with 
normal breathing. 

9. With an exhalation, lower the 
body to the floor by bending the 
knees and elbows. 



141 



J42 




This asana is the beginning of 
the advanced and difficult 
back-bending poses. It tones the 
spine by stretching it fully and 
keeps the body alert and supple. 
The back feels strong and full of 
life. It strengthens the arms and 
wrists and has a very soothing 
effect on the head. It gives one 
great vitality, energy and a 
feeling of lightness. 







116 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


57| Savasana (also called 
Mrtdsana) 

Sava or Mrta means a corpse. In this 
asana the object is to imitate a corpse. 
Once life has departed, the body 
remains still and no movements are 
possible. By remaining motionless for 
some time and keeping the mind still 
while you are fully conscious , you 
learn to relax. This conscious 
relaxation invigorates and refreshes 
both body and mind. But-it is much 
harder to keep the mind than the body 
still. Therefore , this apparently easy 
posture is one of the most difficult to 
master. 


TECHNIQUE 

1. Lie flat on the back full length 
like a corpse. Keep the hands a 
little away from the thighs, with 
the palms up. 

2. Close the eyes. If possible 
place a black cloth folded four 
times over the eyes. Keep the 
heels together and the toes 
apart. 

3. To start with breathe deeply. 
Later the breathing should be fine 
and slow, with no jerky 
movements to disturb the spine 
or the body. 

4. Concentrate on deep and fine 
exhalations, in which the nostrils 
do not feel the warmth of breath. 

5. The lower jaw should hang 
loose and not be clenched. The 
tongue should not be disturbed, 
and even the pupils of the eyes 
should be kept completely 
passive. 



146 


6. Relax completely and breath 
out slowly. 

7. If the mind wanders, pause 
without any strain after each 
slow exhalation. 

8. Stay in the pose from 15 to 20 
minutes. 

9. One is apt to fall asleep in the 
beginning. Gradually, when the 
nerves become passive, one feels 
completely relaxed and refreshed. 

When well refreshed one feels 
energy flow from the back of the 
head towards the heels and not 
the other way round. One also 
feels as if the body is elongated. 

EFFECTS 

Verse 32 of the First Chapter of 
the Hatha Yoga Pradipikd states: 
'Lying upon one's back on the 
ground at full length like a 
corpse is called Savasana. This 
removes the fatigue caused by 
the other asanas and induces 
calmness of mind.' 

Mrtasana is thus described in 
verse 11 of the Second Chapter 
of the Gheranda Samhitd : 


' Lying flat on the ground (on one's 
back) like a corpse is called 
Mrtdsana. This posture destroys 
fatigue, and quiets the agitation of the 
mind 

The mind is the lord of the 
Indriyas (the organs of senses); the 
Prana (the Breath of Life) is the lord 
of the mind.' 'When the mind is 
absorbed it is called Mok$a (final 
emancipation , liberation of the soul); 
when Prana and Manas (the mind) 
have been absorbed, an unde finable joy 
ensues.' 

Verses 29 and 30, chapter IV, 
Hatha Yoga Pradlpika. 

To tame Prana depends upon the 
nerves. Steady, smooth, fine and 
deep breathing without any jerky 
movements of the body soothes 
the nerves and calms the mind. 
The stresses of modern 
civilization are a strain on the 
nerves for which Savasana is the 
best antidote. 



PART III 


Pranayama 


HINTS AND CAUTIONS 

Read and digest thoroughly the following hints and cautions before 
attempting the pranayama techniques mentioned later. 

QUALIFICATIONS FOR FITNESS 

1. Just as post-graduate training depends upon the ability and discipline 
acquired in mastering the subject in which one graduated, so pranayama 
training demands mastery of asanas and the strength and discipline 
arising therefrom. 

2. The fitness of the aspirant for training and advancement in pranay- 
ama is to be gauged by an experienced Guru or teacher and his personal 
supervision is essential. 

3. Pneumatic tools can cut through the hardest rock. In Pranayama the 
yogi uses his lungs as pneumatic tools. If they are not used properly, 
they destroy both the tool and the person using it. The same is true of 
pranayama* 

CLEANLINESS AND FOOD 

4. One does not enter a temple with a dirty body or mind. Before enter- 
ing the temple of his own body, the yogi observes the rules of 
cleanliness, 

5. Before starting pranayama practices the bowels should be evacuated 
and the bladder emptied. This leads to comfort in the bandhas. 

6* Preferably pranayama should be practised on an empty stomach, but 
if this is difficult, a cup of milk, tea, coffee or cocoa may be taken. Allow 
at least six hours to elapse after a meal before practising pranayama. 

7, Light food may be taken half an hour after finishing pranayama 
practices, 

TIME AND PLACE 

8, The best time for practice is in the early morning (preferably before 
sunrise) and after sunset. According to the Hatha Yoga Pradfpika, pranay- 
ama should be practised four times a day, in the early morning, noon. 


118 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 

evening and midnight, with 80 cycles at a time (chapter II, verse 11). 
This is hardly possible in the fast modern age. What is therefore rec- 
ommended is to practice at least 15 minutes a day, but the 80 cycles 
are for intensely devoted practitioners, and not for the average house- 
holder. 

9. The best seasons in which to start the practice are spring and autumn 
when the climate is equable. 

10. Pranayama should be done in a clean airy place, free from insects. 
Since noise creates restlessness practice during quiet hours. 

11. Pranayama should be practised with determination and regularity 
at the same time and place and in the same posture. Variation is permiss- 
ible only in the type of pranayama practised, that is to say, if Surya 
Bhedana Pranayama is done one day, 6itall may be done the next day 
and Bhastrika be done on the third day. Nadi Sodhana Pranayama, 
however, should be practised daily. 

POSTURE 

12. Breathing in pranayama practices is done through the nose only, 
except in &itall and §itakari. 

13. Pranayama is best done sitting on the floor on a folded blanket. The 
postures suitable are Siddhasana, Virasana, Padmasana and Baddha- 
konasana. Any other sitting posture may be taken provided the back is 
kept absolutely erect from the base of the spine to the neck and perpen- 
dicular to the floor. Some types, however, may be done in a reclining 
position as detailed later. 

14. During practice no strain should be felt in the facial muscles, eyes 
and ears, or in the neck muscles, shoulders, arms, thighs and feet. The 
thighs and arms should be relaxed deliberately since they are unconsci- 
ously tensed during pranayama. 

15. Keep the tongue passive or saliva will accumulate in the mouth. If 
it does, swallow it before exhalation (rechaka) and not while holding 
the breath (kumbhaka). 

16. During inhalation and retention the rib cage should expand both 
forwards and sideways, but the area below the shoulder-blades and 
armpits should only expand forwards. 

17. To start with there will be perspiration and trembling which will 
disappear in course of time. 

18. In all the pranayama practices done in a sitting posture, the head 
should hang down from the nape of the neck, the chin resting in the 


Pranayama 119 


notch between the collar-bones on the top of the breast-bone. This chin- 
lock or Jalandhar a Bandha should be used except where specifically 
stated in the techniques hereafter given. 

19. Keep the eyes closed throughout as otherwise the mind will wander 
after outside objects and be distracted. The eyes, if kept open, will feel 
a burning sensation, and irritability. 

20. No pressure should be felt inside the ear during the practice of 
pranayama. 

21. The left arm is kept straight, the back of the wrist resting on the left 
knee. The forefinger is bent towards the thumb, its tip touching the tip 
of the thumb. This is the Jnana Mudra described later in the technique. 

22. The right arm is bent at the elbow and the hand is kept on the nose 
to regulate the even flow of breath and to gauge its subtlety. This is felt 
through the tips of the ring and little fingers which control the left nostril 
and through the tip of the thumb which controls the right nostril. Details 
of the right hand position are discussed in the technique. In some 
methods of pranayama both the hands rest on the knees in the Jnana 
Mudra. 


23. When a baby learns to walk by itself, the mother remains passive 
bodily, but alert mentally. In an emergency, as when the child stumbles, 
her body springs into action to save it from a fall. So also, in the practice 
of pranayama the brain is kept passive but alert. Whenever the organs 
of the body fail to work properly, the watchful brain sends messages of 
warning. The ear is told to listen for the proper sound of the breath 
(which is described below). The hand and nose are told to observe the 
sensitivity of the breath flowing through the nasal passages. 


\ 


24. It may be asked that if the brain is required to send warnings to the 
senses, how can one concentrate on pranayama? A painter absorbed in 
his work notes various details like perspective and composition, the 
colour tones and shades, the foreground and background and the 
strokes of the paint-brush all at once. A musician playing a melody 
watches his finger movements and sound patterns, the tuning of the 
instrument and its pitch. Though the artist and the musician are both 
observing and correcting the details, they are concentrating on their 
work. So also the yogi observes details like time, posture and an even 
breath rhythm, and is alert and sensitive to the flow of prana within him. 

25. Asa careful mother teaches her child to walk carefree, so the careful 
mind of the yogi teaches the senses to be carefree. By continued practice 
of pranayama the senses become free of obsession for the things they 
once pined for. 


120 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


26. Each should measure his own capacity when doing pranayama and 
not exceed it. This may be gauged as follows: suppose one can with 
comfort inhale and exhale for 10 seconds each in rhythmic cycles for a 
given length of time, say 5 minutes. If there is any change in the rhythm 
in which the period of inhalation decreases, to say 7 or 8 seconds, one 
has reached one's capacity. To go beyond this point, strains the lungs 
unduly and brings in its wake a host of respiratory diseases. 

27. Faulty practice puts undue stress on the lungs and diaphragm. The 
respiratory system suffers and the nervous system is adversely affected. 
The very foundation of a healthy body and sound mind is shaken by 
faulty practice of prapayama. Forceful and strained inhalation or exha- 
lation is wrong. 

28. Evenness of breathing leads to healthy nerves and so to evenness 
of mind and temper. 

29. Asanas should never be practised immediately after pranayama. If 
pranayama is done first, allow an hour to elapse before starting asanas, 
for the nerves which are soothed in pranayama are liable to be ruffled 
by the bodily movement of the asanas. 

30. Pranayama, however, may be done not less than 15 minutes after 
mild practice of asanas. 

31. Strenuous asanas cause fatigue. When exhausted do not practise 
pranayama in any sitting posture, as the back cannot stay erect, the 
body trembles and the mind becomes disturbed. Deep breathing as in 
Ujjayi done in a reclining position relieves fatigue. 

32. When deep, steady and long breathing cannot be maintained rhyth- 
mically, stop. Do not proceed further. The rhythm should be gauged 
from the nasal sound produced in inhalation ('ssssssa' which sounds 
like a leak in a cycle tube) and exhalation (the aspirate 'huuuuuuuuum' 
sound). If the volume of the sound is reduced, stop. 

33. Try to achieve an even ratio in inhalation (puraka) and exhalation 
(rechaka). For example, if one is for 5 seconds during a given continuous 
cycle, the other should be for the same time. 

34. The Ujjayi and Nadi 6odhana types of pranayama are the most 
beneficial ones which can be practised by pregnant women, preferably 
in Baddhakonasana. During pregnancy, however, the breath should 
never be held without the guidance of an experienced teacher. 

35. After completing any pranayama practice always lie down on the 
back like a corpse in 6avasana (Plate 146) for at least 5 to 10 minutes in 
silence. The mind should be completely switched off and every limb and 


sense organ completely passive as if dead. &avasana after pranayama 
refreshes both the body and the mind. 

KUMBHAKAS 

36. Thorough mastery of inhalation (puraka) and exhalation (rechaka) is 
essential before any attempt is made to learn antara kumbhaka (retention 
following inhalation). 

37. Bahya kumbhaka (restraint following exhalation) should not be tried 
until antara kumbhaka has become natural. 

38. During the practice of kumbhaka there is a tendency to draw in air 
as well as to tighten and loosen the diaphragm and abdominal organs 
for the sake of increasing the period of retention. This is unconscious 
and unintentional. Care should be taken to avoid it. 

39. If it is found difficult to hold the breath (khumbaka) after each inha- 
lation or exhalation, do some cycles of deep breathing and then practise 
kumbhakas. For instance, 3 cycles of deep breathing may be followed 
by one cycle of kumbhaka. Then there should be another 3 cycles of 
deep breathing followed by a second cycle of kumbhaka, and so on. 

40. If the rhythm of inhalation or exhalation is disturbed by holding the 
breath, lessen the duration of kumbhaka. 

41. Persons suffering from eye or ear trouble (like glaucoma and pus in 
the ear) should not attempt to hold the breath. 

42. Sometimes constipation occurs in the initial stages following upon 
the introduction of kumbhaka. This is temporary and will disappear in 
due course. 

43. The normal rate of breaths per minute is 15. This rate increases 
when the body is upset by indigestion, fever, cold and cough, or by 
emotions like fear, anger or lust. The normal rate of breathing is 21,600 
breaths inhaled and exhaled every 24 hours. The yogi measures his span 
of life not by the number of days, but of breaths. Since breathing is 
lengthened in pranayama, its practice leads to longevity. 

44. Continuous practice of pranayama will change the mental outlook 
of the practitioner and reduce considerably the craving of his senses for 
worldly pleasures like smoking, drinking and sexual indulgence. 

45. In the practice of pranayama the senses are drawn inwards and in 
the silence of the kumbhaka the aspirant hears his inner voice calling: 
'Look within! The source of all happiness is within!' This also prepares 
him for the next stage of yoga, pratyahara, which leads to freedom from 
the domination and tyranny of the senses. 


122 


The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


46* Since the eyes are kept dosed throughout the practice of prana yama, 
the passage of time is noted by the mental repetition (japa) of a sacred 
word or name* This repetition of the sacred words or names is the seed 
(blja) planted in the yogi's mind. This seed grows and makes him fit 
for dhyana or concentration, the sixth stage of Yoga. Ultimately it pro- 
duces the fruit of samadhi, where there is experience of full conscious- 
ness and supreme joy, where the yogi merges with the Maker of the 
Universe and feels what he can never express - yet cannot entirely 
conceal. Words fail to convey the experience adequately, for the mind 
cannot find words with which to describe it. It is a feeling of that peace 
which passeth all understanding* 


P r a n a y a m a 123 


TECHNIQUE AND EFFECTS OF PRANAYAMA 



58[ Ujjayt Pranayama 

The prefix ud attached to t>erfrs and 
tt£?H?rs, means upwards or superiority 
in rank. It also means blowing or 
expanding. H conveys the sense of 
pre-eminence and power. 

jaya memts conquest , victory , 
triumph or success. Looked at from 
another viewpoint it implies restraint 
or curbing , 

Ujjdyi is the process hi ivhich the 
lungs are fully expanded and the chest 
puffed out like that of a proud 
conqueror . 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit in any comfortable position 
like Pad ma sana (Plate 53), 
Siddhasana (Plate 38) or Virasana 
(Plate 43). 

2. Keep the back erect and rigid. 
Lower the head to the trunk. Rest 
the chin in the notch between the 
collar-bones just above the 
breast-bone. (This is the 
Jalandhara Bandha. Jala means a 
net, web, lattice or a mesh.) 

3. Stretch the arms out straight 
and rest the back of the wrists on 
the knees. Join the tips of the 
index fingers to the tips of the 
thumbs, keeping the other 
fingers extended, (This position 
or gesture of the hand is known 
as the Jriana Mudra, the symbol 
or seal of knowledge. The index 
finger symbolizes the individual 
soul and the thumb the Universal 
Soul. The union of the two 
symbolizes knowledge.) 


14 ? 

4. Close the eyes and look 
inwards. (Plate 147) 

5. Exhale completely, 

6, Now the Ujjayi method of 
breathing begins. 

7, Take a slow, deep steady 
breath through both nostrils. 
The passage of the incoming air 
is felt on the roof of the palate 
and makes a sibilant sound (sa). 
This sound should be heard. 


8, Fill the lungs up to the brim. 
Care should be taken not to bloat 
the abdomen in the process of 
inhalation, (Observe this m all 
types of Pranayama.) This filling 
up is called puraka (inhalation). 

9, The entire abdominal area 
from the pubes up to the 
breast-bone should be pulled 
back towards the spine. 

10, Hold the breath for a second 
or two. 


124 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


11. Exhale slowly, deeply and 
steadily, until the lungs are 
completely empty. As you begin 
to exhale, keep your grip on the 
abdomen. After two or three 
seconds of exhalation, relax the 
diaphragm gradually and slowly. 
While exhaling the passage of 
the outgoing air should be felt on 
the roof of the palate. The 
brushing of the air on the palate 
should make an aspirate sound 
(ha). This exhalation is called 
rechaka. 

12. Wait for a second before 
drawing a fresh breath. This 
waiting period is called bahya 
kumbhaka. 

13. The process described from 
para, 7 to para, 12 completes one 
cycle of Ujjayi Prana yama. 

14. Repeat the cycles for five to 
ten minutes keeping the eyes 
closed throughout. 

15. Lie on the floor for Savasana 
(Plate 146) 

16. Ujjayi Prana yama may be 
done without the jalandhara 
Bandha even while walking or 
lying down. This is the only 
pranayama which can be done at 
all times of the day and night. 


EFFECTS 

This type of pranayama aerates 
the lungs, removes phlegm, 
gives endurance, soothes the 
nerves and tones the entire 
system. Ujjayi without 
kumbhaka, done in a reclining 
position, is ideal for persons 
suffering from high blood 
pressure or coronary troubles. 


59| Surya Bhedana 
Pranayama 

Surya is the sun. Bhedana is derived 
from the root bhid meaning to pierce , 
to break or pass through. 

In Surya Bhedana Pranayama , the 
breath is inhaled through the right 
nostril. In other words the prana 
passes through the Pihgdla or Surya 
nddl A kumbhaka is then performed 
and the breath is then exhaled through 
the left twstril which is the path of 
the Ida nddl 

TECHNIQUE 

1. Sit in any comfortable position 
like Padmasana (Plate 53), 
Siddhasana (Plate 38) or VIrasana 
(Plate 43). 

2. Keep the back erect and rigid. 
Lower the head to the trunk. Rest 
the chin in the notch between the 
collar-bones just above the 
breast-bone, (This is Jalandhara 
Bandha,) 

3. Stretch the left arm. Rest the 
back of the left wrist on the left 
knee. Perform Jriana with the left 
hand (as stated in stage 3 of the 
technique of Ujjayi). 

4. Bend the right arm at the 
elbow. Bend the index and middle 
fingers towards the palm, 
keeping them passive. Bring the 
ring and little fingers towards the 
thumb. (Plate 148) 




Praqayam a 125 



12. Keeping the right nostril 
completely blocked, open the 
left nostril partially and exhale 
through it slowly and deeply 
(rechaka). 

13. During the exhalation 
regulate the rhythmic flow of air 
from the left nostril by adjusting 
pressure with the ring and little 
fingers, so that the outer edge of 
the left nostril is kept parallel to 
the septum. The pressure should 
be exerted from the inner sides 
of the tips of the fingers (away 
from the nails). 

14. This completes one cycle of 
Surya Bhedana Pranayama. 
Continue with more cycles at a 
stretch from 5 to 10 minutes, 
according to capacity. 

15. All the inhalations in Surya 
Bhedana are from the right nostril 
and all the exhalations from the 
left nostril. 


5, Place the right thumb on the 
right side of the nose just below 
the nasal bone, the ring and little 
fingers on the left side of the. 
nose just below the nasal bone, 
just above the curve of the fatty 
tissue of the nostrils above the 
upper jaw. 

6, Press the ring and the little 
finger to block the left side of the 
nose completely. 

7, With the right thumb, press 
the fatty tissue on the right side 
so as to make the outer edge of 
the right nostril parallel to the 
lower edge of the cartilage of the 
septum. 


8. The right thumb is bent at the 
top joint and the tip of the thumb 
is placed at a right angle to the 
septum. (Plate 149) 

9. Now inhale slowly and deeply 
controlling the aperture of the 
right nostril with the tip of the 
thumb nearer the nail. Fill the 
lungs to the brim (puraka). 

10. Then block the right nostril 
so that both are now blocked, 

11. Hold the breath for about 
5 seconds (antara kumbhaka). 




126 The Illustrated Light on Yoga 


16. Throughout the process, the 
passage of air is felt at the tips of 
the fingers and the thumbs and 
in the nasal membranes where 
pressure is applied. The passage 
of air makes a sound similar to air 
escaping from a cycle tube. This 
sound should be maintained 
constant throughout by varying 
pressure on the nostrils. 

17. The eyes, temples, eyebrows 
and the skin on the forehead 
should remain completely 
passive and show no* sign of 
strain. 

18. The mind should be absorbed 
completely in listening to the 
proper sound of the passage of 
air and in maintaining a proper 
rhythm in breathing. 

19. Each inhalation and 
exhalation should last for the 
same length of time. 

20. The inhalation and the 
exhalation should not be forced. 
An even and slow rhythm should 
be maintained throughout. 

21. Lie down in 6avasana after 
completing pranayama. (Plate 
146) 


EFFECTS 

By reason of the pressure on the 
nostrils, in this Pranayama the 
lungs have to work more than in 
the case of Ujjayi. In Surya 
Bhedana they filled more slowly, 
steadily, and fuller than in Ujjayi. 
Surya Bhedana increases 
digestive power, soothes and 
invigorates the nerves, and 
cleans the sinuses. 

NOTE 

It often happens that the 
passages of both the nostrils are 
not of the same width, one being 
bigger than the other. In that case 
the pressure of the fingers has to 
be adjusted. In some cases the 
right nostril is completely blocked 
while the left one is clear. In that 
case, inhalation may be done 
only through the left nostril, while 
exhalation is done only through 
the right nostril. In course of 
time due to the manipulation of 
the fingers the right nostril clears 
and inhalation through it 
becomes possible. 

Persons suffering from low 
blood pressure will derive 
benefit but those with high 
blood pressure or heart trouble 
should not hold their breath after 
inhalation (antara kumbhaka) 
whilst practising this 
pranayama. 


60 ) Nddt Sodhana 
Pranayama 

Nadi is a tubular organ of the body 
like an artery or a vein for the passage 
of prana or energy. A nadi has three 
layers like an insulated electric wire . 
The innermost layer is called sira, the 
middle layer datnani and the entire 
organ as well as the outer layer is 
called nddf. 

Sodhana meaning purifying or 
cleansing , so the object of Nadi 
Sodhana Pranayama is the 
purification of the nerves. A little 
obstruction in a water pipe can cut 
off the supply completely. A little 
obstruction in the nerves can cause 
great discomfort and paralyse a limb 
or organ. 
