A Large number of thougthiul people, both in the East and 
the West, are genuinely interested in the subject of Toga. 
This is natural because a man who has begun to question life 
and its deeper problems wants; something more definite 
and vital for his spiritual needs than a mere promise of 
heavenly joys or ' eternal life ' when he passes out of his brief 
and feverish life on this planet. Those who have lost faith in 
the ideals of orthodox religions and yet feel that their life is 
not a meaningless and passing phenomenon of Nature natur- 
ally turn to the philosophy of Toga for the solution of problems 
connected with their ' inner ' life. 

People who take up the study of Toga with the object of 
finding a more satisfactory solution of these problems are 
likely to meet with one serious difficulty. They may find the 
philosophy interesting, even fascinating, but too much en- 
veloped in mystery and rigmarole to be of much practical 
value in their life. For there is no subject which is so much 
wrapped up in mystery and on which one can write whatever 
one likes without any risk of being proved wrong. To a 
certain extent this atmosphere of mystery and obscurity which 
surrounds Toga is due to the very nature of the subject itself. 
The philosophy of Toga deals with some of the greatest 
mysteries of life and the Universe and so it must inevitably 
be associated with an atmosphere of profound mystery. But 
much of the obscurity of Togic literature is due, not to the 
intrinsic profundity of the subject, but to the lack of correla- 
tion between its teachings and the facts with which an 



VJ 



THE SCIENCE OF YOGA 



ordinary educated man is expected to be familiar. If the 
doctrines of Toga are studied in the light of both ancient and 
modern thought it is much easier for the student to understand 
and appreciate them. The discoveries made in the field of 
Science are especially helpful in enabling the student to under- 
stand certain facts of Togic life, for there is a certain analogous 
relationship between the laws of higher life and life as it 
exists on the physical plane, a relationship which is hinted at 
in the well-known Occult maxim ' As above, so below '. 

Some teachers of Toga have attempted to meet this 
difficulty by taking out of the philosophy and technique of 
Toga those particular practices which are easy to understand 
and practise, placing these before the general public as Togic 
teachings. Many of these practices like Asana, Prdriqydma etc. 
are of a purely physical nature and when divorced from the 
higher and essential teachings of Toga reduce their systems to 
a science of physical culture on a par with other systems of a 
similar nature. This over-simplification of the problem of 
Togic life, though it has dene some good and helped some 
people to live a saner and healthier physical life, has greatly 
vulgarized the movement for Togic culture and produced a 
wrong impression, especially in the West, about the real pur- 
pose and technique of Toga. 

What is needed, therefore, for the average student of 
Toga is a clear, intelligible presentation of its philosophy and 
technique which gives a correct and balanced idea of all its 
aspects in terms of modern thought. For, while it is true that 
many aspects of Togic life are beyond the comprehension of 
those confined within the realms of the intellect, still, the 
general philosophy and the broader aspects of its technique 
can be understood by the serious student who is familiar with 
the main trends of philosophical and religious thought and 
is prepared to bring to his study an open and eager mind. 



PREFACE 



vu 



He can, at least, understand this philosophy sufficiently to be 
able to decide whether it is worth his while to undertake a 
deeper study of the subject and later, to enter the path of 
Toga as a Sadhaka. For, it is only when he enters the path of 
practical Toga and begins to bring about fundamental changes 
in his nature that he can hope to gain real insight into the 
problems of Toga and their solution. 

This book is meant to give to the serious student of Toga 
a clear idea with regard to the fundamental teachings of Toga 
in a language which he can understand. It does not present 
Toga from any particular angle or on the basis of any partic- 
ular school of philosophy. Those who study the book will 
see for themselves that this Science Of sciences is too compre- 
hensive in its nature and toO profound in its doctrines to be 
fitted into the framework of any particular philosophy, ancient 
or modern. It stands in its own right as a Science based 
upon the eternal laws of the higher life and does not requirb 
the support of any science or philosophical system to uphold 
its claims. Its truths are based on the experiences and 
experiments of an unbroken line of mystics, occultists, saints 
and sages who have realized and borne witness to them 
throughout the ages. Although an attempt has been made 
to explain the teachings of Toga on a rational basis so that the 
student may be able to grasp them easily nothing is sought 
to be proved in the ordinary sense. The facts of higher Toga 
can neither be proved nor demonstrated. Their appeal is to 
the intuition and not to the intellect. 

There is a vast literature dealing with all aspects and 
types of Toga. But the beginner who attempts to dive into 
this chaotic mass is likely to feel repulsed by the confusion 
and exaggerated statements which he is likely to find every- 
where. Round a small nucleus of fundamental and genuine 
teachings of Toga has grown up during the course of 



vm 



THE SCIENCE OF YOGA 



thousands of years a volume of spurious literature composed 
of commentaries, expositions of minor systems of Togic culture 
and Tdntric practices. Any inexperienced student who enters 
this jungle is likely to feel bewildered and to come out of it 
with a feeling that his pursuit of the Togic ideal might prove 
a waste of time. The student would, therefore, do well to 
confine himself to the basic literature to avoid confusion 
and frustration. 

In this basic literature of Toga, the Toga-Sutras Of 
Patanjali stand out as "the most authoritative and useful book. 
In its 196 Sutras the author has condensed the essential 
philosophy and technique of Toga in a manner which is a 
marvel of condensed and systematic exposition. The student 
who studies the book for the first time or superficially may 
find the treatment rather strange and haphazard, but a more 
careful and deeper study will reveal the rational basis of the 
treatment. The following synopsis will show how rational 
the whole treatment is. 

The first Section deals with the general nature of Toga 
and its technique. It is meant really to answer the question 
' What is Toga ? ' Since Samddhi is the essential technique of 
Toga, naturally, it occupies the most important position among 
the various topics dealt with in the Section. This Section is, 
therefore, called Samddhi Pdda. 

The first part of the second Section deals with the philo- 
sophy of Kteias and is meant to provide an answer to the 
question ' Why should anyone practise Toga ? ' It gives a 
masterly analysis of the conditions of human life and the 
■misery and suffering which are inherent in these conditions. 
The philosophy of Kleias must be thoroughly understood by 
any person who is to take to the path of Toga with the 
unalterable determination to persevere, life after life, until he 
has reached the End. The second part of Section II deals 



PREFACE 



IX 



with the first five practices of Togic technique which are 
referred to as Bahiranga or external. These practices are. of a 
preparatory nature and are meant to make the Sddhaka fit for 
the practice of Samddhi. As this Section is meant to fit the 
aspirant physically, mentally, emotionally and morally for the 
practice of Higher Toga it is Called Sadhana Pdda. 

The first part of the third Section deals with the three 
remaining practices of Togic technique which are referred to 
as Antaranga or internal. It is through these practices which 
culminate in Samddhi that all the mysteries of Togic life are 
unravelled and the powers or Siddhis are acquired. Jh the 
second part of this Section these accomplishments are dis- 
cussed in detail and the Section is, therefore, called Vibhuti 
Pdda. 

In the fourth and the last Section are expounded all 
those essential philosophical problems which are involved in 
the study and practice of Toga. The nature of the mind 
and mental perception, of desire and its binding effect, of 
Liberation and the results which follow it, are all dealt with 
briefly but systematically to enable the student to have an 
adequate background of theoretical knowledge. Since all 
these topics are connected in one way or another with the 
attainment of Kaivalya, the Section is called Kaivalya Pdda. 

On account of its comprehensive and systematic treat- 
ment of the subject the Toga-Sutras is the most suitable book 
for deep and systematic study of Toga. In the olden days all 
students of Toga were made to commit it to memory and 
meditate regularly and deeply on the Sutras for bringing out 
their hidden meanings. But the modern student, who has to 
be convinced first that the study and practice of Toga is 
worthwhile, needs a more detailed and elaborate treatment of 
the subject to enable him to understand its philosophy as 
a whole. Even for this purpose the Toga-Sutras is the most 



THE SCIENCE OF YOGA 



PREFACE 



XI 



suitable basis, not only because it gives all the essential in- 
formation about Toga, in a masterly manner but also because 
it is recognized as a masterpiece in the literature of Toga and 
has stood the test of time and experience. It is for this reason 
that it has been made the basis of the present book. 

The task of an author who undertakes to write a com- 
mentary on a book like the Toga-Sutras is not an easy one. 
He is dealing with a subject of the most profound nature. 
The ideas which he has to interpret are given in the form* 
of Sutras which embody the art of condensation to the utmost 
limit. The language with which the Sutras are constructed 
is- an ancient one which, though extraordinarily effective in 
the expression of philosophical ideas, can lend itself to an 
extraordinary variety of interpretations. And what is most 
important, he is dealing with a Science which is related to 
facts which come within the range of human experience. 
He cannot like the academic philosopher give free rein to his 
imagination and put forward merely an ideal interpretation. 
He has to show things, to the best of his ability, as they 
actually are and not as they should be or might be. Keeping 
in view the possibility of the changes which are always 
brought about in the connotations of words with lapse, of 
time it is extremely hazardous to interpret the Sutras rigidly 
according to their literal meaning. Of course, one cannot 
take liberties with a book like the Toga-Sutras which has been 
written by a master mind in a language which is considered 
almost perfect. But it is one thing to interpret a Sutra in a 
loose and careless manner and another to bring out its 
meaning with due regard to facts of experience and re- 
cognized traditions of ages. The sensible way, of course, 
is to take into consideration all the factors which are 
involved, avoiding especially explanations which explain 
nothing. 



Another difficulty in writing a commentary in English is 
the impossibility of finding exact equivalents for many 
Samskrta words. Since the Science of Toga has flourished 
mainly in the East and the interest in Toga in the West is of 
recent origin there are no equivalents in the English language 
corresponding to many Samskrta words which stand for well- 
defined philosophical concepts. And in many cases the 
available English words with approximate meanings are 
liable to give a totally wrong impression. To avoid this 
danger Samskrta words have been used freely in the com- 
mentary if an exact equivalent in English is not available. 
But to facilitate careful study of the subject, not only is the 
original Samskrta text given in the case of each Sutra but also 
the meanings of the Samskrta words used in the Sutra. Of 
course, as pointed out above the exact English equivalents 
of many Samskrta words are not available. In such cases 
only approximate meanings have been given and the student 
is expected to find the exact significance of the words from 
the following commentary. The above procedure will enable 
the student to judge for himself how far the interpretation is 
in accordance with the literal meanings of the words used in 
the Sutra, and if there is a divergence, how far the divergence 
is justified. But, of course, the final justification for any 
interpretation is its conformity with the facts of experience 
and if this kind of verification is not possible, commonsense 
and reason should be the guide. The seeker after Truth 
should concern himself especially with facts and the truth 
underlying the various Sutras and should not allow himself to 
get involved in controversies about the meanings of words. 
This pastime he can leave to the mere scholar. 

A careful study of the Toga-Sutras and the kind of pre- 
paration and effort which is needed for attaining the objective 
of Togic endeavour might give to the student the impression 



L 



Xll 



THE SCIENCE OF YOGA 



that it is an extremely difficult, if not impossible undertaking, 
beyond the capacity of the ordinary aspirant. This impres- 
sion is certain to dishearten him, and if he does not think 
deeply over the problems of life and clarify his ideas about 
them, it might lead him to abandon the idea of embarking 
on this Divine adventure or to postpone it to a future life. 
There can be no doubt that the serious pursuit of the Togic 
ideal is a difficult task and cannot be undertaken, as a mere 
hobby or to find an escape from the stress and strain of 
ordinary life. It can be undertaken only on understanding 
fully the nature of human life and the misery and suffering 
which are inherent in it and the further realization that the 
only way to end this misery and suffering permanently is to 
find the Truth which is enshrined within ourselves, by the 
only method which is available, namely, Togic discipline. It 
is also true that the attainment of this objective is a long-term 
affair and the aspirant should be prepared to spend a number 
of lives — as many lives as may be required — in its whole- 
hearted and single-minded pursuit. No one can know in the 
begin n i n g his potentialities and how much time will be needed. 
He can hope for the best but must be prepared for the worst. 
Those who do not feel themselves equal to this task are 
not under any compulsion to attempt it immediately. They 
can continue the theoretical study of Toga, think constantly 
over life's deeper problems, try to purify their mind and 
strengthen their character, until their power of discrimination 
becomes sufficiently strong to enable them to pierce through 
ordinary illusions and see life in its naked reality. In fact, 
this is the purpose of Kriyd Toga to which Patanjali has 
referred in the beginning of Section II. When the. inner 
eyes of true discrimination begin to open as a result of the 
practice of Kriyd Toga they will cease to wonder whether they 
are strong enough to undertake this long and difficult journey 



PREFACE 



XU1 



to their true homes. Then nothing will be able to stop them, 
and they will naturally and whole-heartedly devote them- 
selves to this difficult but sacred task. 

The important point is to make a definite beginning 
somewhere and as soon as possible — Now. The moment such 
a serious beginning is made forces begin to gather round the 
centre of endeavour and take the aspirant forward towards 
his goal, slowly at first, but with increasing speed until he 
becomes so absorbed in the pursuit of his ideal that time and 
distance cease to matter for him. And one day he finds that 
he has reached his goal and looks back with a kind of wonder 
at the long and tedious journey which he has completed in 
the realm of Time while all the time he was living in the 
Eternal. 

I. K. Taimni 




CONTENTS 



PREFACE 
V 

SECTION I 

Samadhi Pada 
1 

SECTION II 

Sadhana P5da 
125 

SECTION III 

Vibhilti Pada 
27S 

SECTION IV 

Kaivalya Pada 

S75 



INDEX 

447 



samAdhi PADA 



Atha YcganuSasanam. 

3PT now; herewith *ffar (of) Yoga sprsmnnr expounding; 
exposition (teaching). 



1. 



Now, an exposition of Toga (is to be made). 



Generally, a treatise of this nature in Samskrta begins with a 
Sutra which gives an idea with regard to the nature of the under- 
taking. The present treatise is an ' exposition ' of Toga. The 
author does not claim to be the discoverer of this Science but 
merely an expounder who has tried to condense in a few Sutras 
all the essential knowledge concerning the Science which a student 
or aspirant ought to possess. Very little is known about Pataiijali. 
Although we have no information about him which can be called 
definitely historical, still according to occult tradition -he was the 
same person who was known as Govinda Yogi and who initiated 
Samkaracarya in the Science of Toga. From the masterly manner 
in which he has expounded the subject of Toga in the Toga-Sutras 
it is obvious that he was a Togi of a very high order who bad 
personal knowledge of all aspects of Toga including its practical 
technique. 

As the method of expounding a subject in the form of Sutras 
is peculiar and generally unfamiliar to Western students having 
no knowledge of the Samskrta language, it would perhaps not be 
out of place to say here a few words on this classical method 
which was adopted by the ancient Sages and scholars in then- 
exposition of some of the most important subjects. The word 
Sutram- in Samskrta means a thread and this primary meaning has 



SECTION I (1) 



given rise to the secondary meaning of Sutram as an aphorism. 
Just as a thread binds together a number of beads in a rosary, in 
the same way the underlying continuity of idea binds together in 
outline the essential aspects of a subject. The most important 
characteristics of this method are utmost condensation consistent 
with clear exposition of all essential aspects and continuity of the 
underlying theme in spite of the apparent discontinuity of the 
ideas presented. The latter characteristic is worth noting because 
the effort to discover the hidden ' thread ' of reasoning beneath 
the apparently unconnected ideas very often provides the clue -to 
the meaning of many Sutras. It should be remembered that this 
method of exposition was prevalent at a time when printing was 
unknown and most of the important treatises had to be memorized 
by the student. Hence the necessity of condensation to the utmost 
limit. Nothing essential was, of course, left out but everything 
with which the student was expected to be familiar or which he 
could easily infer from the context was ruthlessly cut out. 

The student will find on careful study what a tremendous 
amount of theoretical and practical knowledge the author has 
managed to incorporate in this very small treatise. Everything 
necessary for the proper understanding of the subject has been 
given at one place or another in a skeleton form. But the body 
of the requisite knowledge has to be dug out, prepared properly, 
chewed and digested before the subject can be understood 
thoroughly in its entirety. The Sutra method of exposition may 
appear to the modern student needlessly obscure and difficult 
but if he goes through the labour required for the mastery of the 
subject he will realize its superiority to the all too easy modern 
methods of presentation. The necessity of struggling with the 
words and ideas and digging out their hidden meanings ensures a 
very thorough assimilation of knowledge and develops simultane- 
ously the powers and faculties of the mind, especially that 
important and indispensable capacity of digging out of one's own 
mind the knowledge which lies buried in its deeper recesses. 

But while this method of exposition is very effective it has its 
drawbacks also. The chief disadvantage is the difficulty which the 
ordinary student who is not thoroughly conversant with the subject 
has in finding the correct meaning. Not only is he likely to find 



samadhi pada 5 

many Sutras difficult to understand on account of their brevity 
but he may completely misunderstand some of them and be led 
astray in a hopeless manner. We have to remember that- in a 
treatise like the Toga-Sutras, behind many a word there is a whole 
pattern of thought of which the word is a mere symbol. To under- 
stand the true significance of the Sutras we must be thoroughly 
familiar with these patterns. The difficulty is increased still 
further when the words have to be translated into another langu- 
age which does not contain exactly equivalent words. 

Those who wrote these treatises were master-minds, masters 
of the subject and language they dealt with. There could be no 
fault in their method of presentation. But in the course of time 
fundamental changes can sometimes be brought about in the 
meaning of words and the thought patterns of those who study 
these treatises. And this fact introduces endless possibilities of 
misunderstanding and misinterpretation of some of the Sutras. 
In treatises of a purely philosophical or religious nature such a 
misunderstanding would perhaps not matter so much, but in one 
of a highly technical and practical nature like the Toga- Smras it 
can lead to ;-reat complications and even to dangers of a serious 
nature. 

Luckily for the earnest student, Toga has always been a living 
Science in the East and it has had an unbroken succession of 
living experts who continually verify by their own experiments 
and experiences the basic truths of this Science. This has helped 
not only to keep the traditions of Togic culture alive and pure but 
to maintain the meanings of the technical words used in this 
Science in a fairly exact and clearly defined form. It is only 
when a Science is divorced completely from its practical appli- 
cation that it tends to lose itself in a morass of words which 
have lost their meaning and relation with the actual facts. 

While the method of presenting a subject in the form of 
Sutras is eminently suited for the practical and advanced student 
it can hardly be denied that it does not quite fit in with our 
modern conditions. In the olden days those who studied these 
Sutras had easy access to the teachers of the Science who elaborated 
the knowledge embodied in a condensed form, filled up the gaps 
and gave practical guidance. And these students had leisure in 



6 SECTION I (1, 2) 

which to think, meditate and dig out the meariings for themselves. 
The modern student who is interested merely in the theoretical 
study of the Togic philosophy and is not practising it under an 
expert teacher has none of these facilities and needs an elaborate 
and clear exposition for an adequate understanding of the subject. 
He needs a commentary which not only aims at explaining the 
obvious meaning but also the hidden significance of the words 
and phrases used in terms of the concepts with which he is 
familiar and can easily understand. He wants his food not in 
'tabloid ' forni but in bulk, and if possible, in a palatable form. * 

Yogas' citta-vrtti-nirodhah. 

*frr: (the essential technique of) yoga f^r (of) mind ^T 
(of) modifications fa^Ofcl: inhibition; suppression; stoppage; 
restraint, 

2. Yoga is the inhibition of the modifications of 
the mind. 



This is one of the most important and well-known Sutras of 
this treatise not because it deals with some important principle or 
technique of practical value but because it defines with the help of 
only four words the essential nature of Toga. There are certain 
concepts in every science which are of a basic nature and which 
must be understood aright if the student is to get a satisfactory 
grasp of the subject as a whole. The ideas underlying all the 
four words in this SUtra are of a fundamental nature and the 
student should try to grasp through study and reflection their real 
meaning. Of course, the significance of these words will become 
Sufficiently clear only when the book has been studied thoroughly, 
and the various aspects of the subject considered in their relation 
to one another. It might be expected that words of such funda- 
mental importance will be carefully defined and such definitions 
inserted wherever they are needed. But in the case of the present 



samAdhi pada 7 

Sutra no such definitions have been given and we can therefore 
conclude that the author expected the student to acquire a 
clear idea with regard to the import of the words from his 
study of the whole book. But as it is necessary for the student 
not to start his study with wrong or confused ideas it will 
perhaps be worthwhile considering at this initial stage the import 
of the words and -the Sutra in a general way. 

Let us begin with the word Toga. The word Toga in Samskrta 
has a very large number of meanings. It is derived from the root 
Tuj which means ' to join ' and the idea of joining runs through 
all the meanings. What are the two things which are sought to 
be joined by the practice of Toga ? According to the highest con- 
ceptions of Hindu philosophy of which the Science of Toga is an 
integral part, the human soul or the Jivatmd is a facet or partial 
expression of the Over-Soul or Paramdtma, the Divine Reality 
which is the source or substratum of the manifested Universe. 
Although in essence the two are the same and are indivisible, still, 
the Jivdlma has become subjectively separated from Paramdtma 
and is destined, after going through an evolutionary cycle in the 
manifested Universe, to become united with Him again in consci- 
ousness. This state of unification of the two in consciousness as 
well as the mental process and discipline through which this union 
is attained are both called Toga. This conception is formulated 
in a different way in the Samkhya philosophy but on close analysis 
the fundamental idea will be found to be essentially the same. 

Then we come to the word Gitta. This word is derived from 
Git or Citi (IV-34) one of the three aspects of Paramdtma called 
Sat-Git-Ananda in Veddnta. It is this aspect which is at the basis 
of the form side of the Universe and through which it is created. 
The reflection of this aspect in the individual soul which is a 
microcosm is called Citta. Citta is thus that instrument or medium 
through which the Jivatmd materializes his individnal world, lives 
and evolves in the world until he has become perfected and 
united with the Paramdtma. Broadly, therefore, Citta cor- 
responds to ' mind 5 of modern psychology but it has a more 
comprehensive import and field for functioning. While Citta may 
be considered as a universal medium through which consciousness 
functions on all the planes of the manifested Universe, the ' mind ' 



8 



SECTION I (2) 



of modern psychology is confined to the expression of only thought, 
volition and feeling. 

We should not, however, make the mistake of imagining 
Gitta as a sort of material medium which is moulded into different 
forms when mental images of different kinds are produced. It is 
fundamentally of the nature of consciousness which is immaterial 
but affected by matter. In fact, it may be called a product of 
both, consciousness and matter, or Purusa and Prakrti, the presence 
of the both being necessary for its functioning. It is like an intangi- 
ble screen which enables the Light of consciousness to be projected 
in the manifested world. But the real secret of its essential nature 
lies buried in the origin of the manifested Universe and can be 
known only on attaining Enlightenment. It is true that the 
theory of perception which is developed in Section IV gives some 
general indication with regard to the nature of Gitta but it does 
not say what Gitta essentially is. 

The third word we have to consider in this Sutra is Vrtti. It 
is derived from the root Vft which means ' to exist '. So Vrtti is a 
way of existing. In considering the ways in which a thing exists 
we may consider its modifications, states, activities or its functions. 
All these connotations are present in the meaning of Vrtti but in the 
present context this word is best translated by the words ' modifi- 
cations ' or ' functionings '. Sometimes the word is translated 
as ' transformations '. This does not seem to be justified because in 
transformation the emphasis is on the change and not on the condi- 
tion. The transformations of Gitta may be stopped and it may still 
remain in one particular modification as happens in Sabija Samadhi. 
As the ultimate aim of Toga is inhibition of all modifications in 
Nirbija Samadhi it will be seen that the word ' transformation ' 
will not adequately express the meaning of the word Vrtti. 
Besides, the word ' transformation ' has to be used for the three 
Parindmas dealt with in the first part of Section III. Since Citta 
has a functional existence and comes into being only when 
consciousness is affected by matter, the word ' functionings ' 
perhaps expresses to the maximum degree the significance of 
Vftti in the present context, but the word ' modifications ' is 
also used generally and understood more easily and may there- 
fore pass. 



SAMADHI p&da 



In trying to understand the nature of Gitta-Vrttis we have to 
guard against a few misconceptions which are sometimes pre- 
valent among those who have not studied the subject deeply. 
The first thing to note is that Gitta-Vrtti is not a vibration. We 
have seen above that Gitta is not material and therefore there can 
be no question of any vibration in it. Vibrations can take place 
only in a vehicle and these vibrations may produce a Gitta-Vrtti. 
The two are different though related. The second point to be 
noted in this connection is that a Gitta-Vrtti is not a mental image 
tiiough it may be and is generally associated with mental images. 
The five-fold classification of Gitta-Vrttis in 1-5 definitely shows 
this. Mental images may be of innumerable kinds but the author 
has classified Gitta-Vrttis under five heads only. This shows 
that Gitta-Vrttis have a more fundamental and comprehensive 
character than the mere mental images with which they are 
associated. This is not the place to enter into a detailed discus- 
sion of the essential nature of Gitta-Vrttis because the question 
involves the essential nature of Gitta. But if the student studies 
carefully the six Sutras (1-6-11) dealing with the five kinds of 
Vrttis he will see that they are the fundamental states or types of 
modifications in which the mind can exist. The author has given 
five types for the modifications of the lower concrete mind with 
which the ordinary man is familiar. But the number and nature 
of these different types are bound to be different in the higher 
realms of Citta. 

The last word to be considered is Nirodha. This word is 
derived from the word Niruddham which means ' restrained % 
' controlled ', ' inhibited '. All these meanings are applicable in 
the different stages of Yoga. Restraint is involved in the initial 
stages, control in the more advanced stages and inhibition or 
complete suppression in the last stage. The subject of Nirodha 
has been dealt with in considering III-9 and the; student should 
read carefully what is written in that connection. 

If the student has understood the meaning of the four words 
in this Sutra he will see that it defines in a masterly manner the 
essential nature of Toga. The effectiveness of the definition lies 
in the fact that it covers all stages of progress through which the 
■Yogi passes and all stages of unfbldment of consciousness which 



10 



SECTION I (2, 3) 



are the result of this progress. It is equally applicable to the 
stage of Kriya-Toga in which he learns the preliminary lessons, to 
the stages of Dharana and Dhyana in which he brings the mind 
under his complete control, to the stage of Sabija Samadhi in which 
he has to suppress the ' seeds ' of SarnprajMia-Samadhi and to the 
last stage of Nirbija Samadhi in which he inhibits all modifications 
of Gitta and passes beyond the realm of Prakrti into the world of 
Reality. The full significance of the Sutra can be understood 
only when the subject of Yoga 'has been studied thoroughly in all 
its aspects and so it is useless to say anything further at this stage. 

Tada drastuh svarupe 'vasthanam. 

?RT then 5^: (of) Seer FP?^ in his ' own form ' or essential 
and fundamental nature aw^MH establishment. 

3. Then the Seer is established in his own essential 
and fundamental nature. 

This Sutra points out in a general way what happens when 
all the modifications of the mind at all levels have been completely 
inhibited. The Seer is established in his Svarupa or in other 
words attains Self-realization. We cannot know what this state 
of Self-realization is, as long as we are involved in the play of 
Gitta-Vrttis. It can only be realized from within and not com- 
prehended from without. Even the partial and superficial com- 
prehension which we can obtain under our present limitations by 
means of study and reflection is possible only after we have 
mastered the whole theory and technique of Toga outlined in this 
treatise. The higher stages of , consciousness which unfold in the 
state of Samadhi and which are referred to in 1-44 and 45 are 
called Rtamhhara or truth-right-bearing. In their light the Yogi 
can know the truth underlying all things in manifestation. But 
he can know the truth in this way of only those things which are 
part of Drsyam, the Seen, not of the Drastd the Seer. For this lie 
has to practise Nirbija Samidhi (1-51). 



samAdhi pAdA 11 

Vrtti-sarupyam itaratra. 

3% (with) modifications (of the mind) til^ujH identification; 
assimilation %&*& elsewhere, in other states. 

4. In other states there is assimilation (of the 
Seer) with the modifications (of the mind) . 

When the Citta-Vrttis are not in the state of Nirodha and the 
Drasfa is not established in his Svarupa he is assimilated with the 
particular Vrtti which happens to occupy the field of his consci- 
ousness for the moment. A simile will perhaps help the student 
to understand this assimilation of consciousness with the trans- 
formation of the mind. Let him imagine a lighted electric bulb 
suspended in a tank full of limpid water. If the water is churned 
violently by some mechanical contrivance it will make all kinds of 
patterns in three dimensions round the bulb, these patterns being 
illuminated by the light from the bulb and changing from moment 
to moment. But what about the bulb itself? It will disappear 
from view, all the light emanating from it being assimilated with 
or lost in the surrounding water. Now, let him imagine the 
churning of water slowed down gradually until the water becomes 
perfectly still. As the three dimensional patterns begin to subside 
gradually the electric bulb gradually emerges into view and when 
the water is quite at rest the bulb alone is seen. This simile 
illustrates in a rather crude way both the assimilation of the 
consciousness of the Puntfa with the modification of the mind and 
its reversion to its own unmodified state when the mind comes to 
rest. The mind may come to rest either through Para-Vatragya 
developed by Isvara-pranidhana or through the practice of Samadhi 
the result in both cases is the same — Enlightenment — and 
Liberation. 

This Sutra, like the previous one, is meant to answer only in a 
general way the question ' what happens to the Purusa when he is 



12 



SECTION I (4, 5) 



not established in his Svarupa? ' Its full significance can be under- 
stood only after the whole book has been studied thoroughly, and 
the various aspects of the subject understood adequately. 

Vrttayah paficatayyah klistaklistak. 

WkF*: (plural of ar%:) modes, modifications or functioning 
of the mind q^^cJ^T: fivefold; of five kinds Pw«*il painful arf^TKST: 
(and) not-painful. 

5. The modifications of the mind are five-fold 
and are painful or not-painful. 

After indicating the essential nature of Togic technique the 
smthor then proceeds to classify the Vrttis. He classifies them in 
two ways. Firstly, in relation to our feelings whether they are 
painful, pleasurable or neutral in their character. And secondly, 
according to the nature of the Pratyaya which is produced in our 
consciousness. 

Let us consider first the reaction of these Vrttis on our feelings. 
This reaction according to Patanjali is either painful or not-pain- 
ful. This will appear to a superficial student a rather strange 
way of classifying the mental modifications. Of course, there are 
certain modifications which are of a neutral character, i.e. they 
do not produce any pleasurable or painful reaction in our mind. 
When, for example, we notice a tree while walking, it is a mere 
sensuous perception which does not arouse any pleasurable or 
painful feeling within us. The vast majority of our sensuous per- 
ceptions which result in the modification of the mind are of this 
neutral character. They have been classed as ' not-painful '. 

But there are other modifications of the mind which do 
arouse a pleasurable or painful feeling within us. For example, 
when we taste, some palatable article of food, or see a beautiful 
sunset or smell a rose there is a distinct feeling of pleasure. On 
the other hand, when we see a horrible sight or hear a cry of 



SAMADHI PADA 



13 



anguish the resulting transformation of the mind is definitely 
painful. Why has then Patanjali classified all such modifications 
of the mind which arouse some feeling within us as painful ? The 
reason for this is given in II- 15 in connection with the philosophy 
of Klefas. It will suffice to mention here that according to the 
theory of Klesas upon which the Togic philosophy is based, all 
pleasurable and painful experiences are really painful to the 
people who have developed the faculty of discrimination and are 
not blinded by the illusions of the lower life. It is our ignorance, 
caused by these illusions, which makes us see pleasure in experi- 
ences which are a potential source of pain and therefore makes us 
run after those pleasures. If our inner eyes were open we would 
see the ' potential ' pain hidden within these pleasures and not 
only when the pain is present in an ' active ' form. We would 
then see the justification for classifying all experiences which 
involve our feelings and thus give rise to Raga and Dvesa as painful. 
This may appear to the student a rather pessimistic view of life 
but let him withhold his judgment until he has studied the 
philosophy ofKlefas in Section II. 

If all experiences involving our feelings are painful then it is 
logical to classify the remaining experiences which are of a neutral 
character and do not affect our feelings as not-painful. It will be 
seen, therefore, that the primary classification of Citta-Vrttis as 
painful and not-painful is not without reason and from the Togic 
point of view perfectly logical and reasonable. 

The other point of view from which the Citta-Vrttis have been 
classified is the nature of the Pratyaya produced in the Citta. The 
object of classifying them in this manner is to show that all our 
experiences in the realm of the mind consist of mental modifica- 
tions and nothing else. The control and complete suppression of 
these modifications, therefore, extinguishes our lower life com- 
pletely and leads inevitably to the dawning of the higher consci- 
ousness. When classified in this manner the Vrttis or modifi- 
cations are stated to be of five kinds as shown in the next Sutra. 

\. M^|U|faM4^fa+<yMrHril<:^: I 

Pramana-viparyaya-vikalpa-nidra-smrtayah. 



14 



SECTION I (6) 



snrm right knowledge fro wrong knowledge fawi fancy ; 
imagination fa2T sleep W<AH : {and) memory. 

6. (They are) right knowledge, wrong knowledge, 
fancy, sleep, and memory. 

Here again, on a cursory examination, the five-fold classifi- 
cation may appear rather odd but a deeper^study will show that 
it is perfectly scientific. If we analyse our mental life, as far as 
its content is concerned, we shall find it to consist of a great varfety 
and number of images, but a closer study of these images will 
show that they can all be classified under the five broad sub-heads 
enumerated in this Sutra. Before we deal with each of these 
separately inr the subsequent five Sutras let us try to understand 
the underlying system of classification in a general way. 

Pramana and Viparyaya comprise all those images which are 
formed by some kind of direct contact through the sense organs 
with the outer world of objects. Vikalpa and Smrti comprise all 
those images Or modifications of the mind which are produced 
without any kind of direct contact with the outer world. They are 
the result of the independent activity of the lower mind using the 
sensuous perceptions which have been gathered before and stored 
in the mind. In the case of Smrti or memory these sensuous per- 
ceptions are reproduced in the mind faithfully, i.e. in the form 
and order in which they were obtained through the sense-organs 
previously. In the case of Vikalpa or imagination they are repro- 
duced in any form and order from the sensuous material present 
in the mind. The imagination can combine these sensuous per- 
ceptions in any form or order, congruous or incongruous but the 
power of combining the sensuous perceptions is under the control 
of the will. In the dream state the will has no control over these 
combinations and they appear before consciousness in haphazard, 
fantastic and frequently absurd combinations influenced to a 
certain extent by the desires present in the sub-conscious mind. 
The higher Self with its will and reason has, as it were, with- 
drawn beyond the threshold of consciousness, leaving the lower 
mind partly entangled with the brain deprived of the rational- 
izing influence of reason and the controlling influence of will. 



SAMADHI PADA 



15 



When even this remnant of the lower mind also withdraws beyond 
the threshold of brain consciousness we have dreamless sleep or 
Nfdrd. In this state there are no mental images in the brain. 
The mind continues to be active on its own plane but its images 
are not reflected on the screen of the physical brain. 

Now, let the student examine his mental activity in the light 
of what has been said above. Let him take any modification of 
the lower concrete mind which works with names and forms and 
see whether he cannot put it under one or the other of these five 
groups. He will find to his surprise that all modifications of the 
lower mind can be classed under one or the other of these sub- 
heads and therefore the system of classification is quite rational. 
It is true that many modifications on analysis will be found to be 
complex and come under two or more groups but the various 
ingredients will all be found to fit under one or another of the five 
groups. That is why the Vrttis are called Pancatqyyah, five-fold. 

It may be asked why only the modifications of the lower con- 
crete mind have been taken into account in this classification of the 
Citta-Vrttis. Gitta comprises all the levels of the mind, the lowest of 
which is called the lower Manas functioning through the Manomaya 
KoJd and dealing with concrete mental images with names and 
forms. The answer to this question is obvious. The ordinary 
man whose consciousness is confined to the lower mind can con- 
ceive of only these concrete images which are derived from 
perceptions through the physical sense-organs. The Citta-Vrttis 
corresponding to the higher levels of the mind though more 
definite and vivid and capable of being expressed indirectly 
through the lower mind are beyond his comprehension and can 
be perceived on their own planes in the state of Samadhi when 
consciousness transcends the lower mind. Toga starts with the 
control and suppression of the lowest kind of Citta-Vrttis with 
which the Sadhaka is familiar and which he can understand. No 
useful purpose could be served by dealing with the Citta-Vrttis 
corresponding with the higher levels of the mind even if these 
Citta-Vrttis were amenable to ordinary classification. The Sadhaka 
has to wait till he learns the technique of Samadhi. 

Let us now consider the five kinds of modifications individ- 
ually, one by one. 



16 



SECTION I (7) 



V9. JT^T^TTWRFPTr: SRFTTfr I 

Pratyaksanumanagamah pramaijani. 

STcTST direct cognition; sense-evidence apTTFT inference arPTT 
(and) testimony; revelation 5R|«||fa tested and attested facts. 

7. (Facts of) right knowledge (are based on) 
direct cognition, inference or testimony. 

Pramdna which may be translated approximately as right 
knowledge or knowledge related to facts, comprises all those 
experiences in which the mind is in direct or indirect contact with 
the object of the senses at the time and the mental perception 
corresponds with the objects. Although three sources of right 
knowledge are mentioned in the Sutra and only in one {Pratyaksa) 
there is direct contact with the object, this does not mean that 
there is no contact with the object in the other two. The contact 
in these two cases is indirect, through some other object or person. 
A simple illustration will make this point clear. Suppose you see 
your car coming to your door. You recognize it at once. This 
knowledge is, of course, Pratyaksa. Now, if you are sitting in your 
room and hear the familiar sound of your car in front of your 
house you recognize it at once as your car. Here your knowledge 
is based on contact with the object but the contact is indirect and 
involves the element of inference. Now suppose again you neither 
see nor hear the car but your servant comes and says that your 
car is at the door. Here again the contact with the object is 
indirect but your knowledge is based on testimony. In all these 
three cases since the image which springs up in your brain corres- 
ponds with a fact, the Citta-Vrtti comes under the category of 
Pramdna or right knowledge. If it does not, for example, if your 
inference with regard to the presence of your car is wrong or the 
servant makes an incorrect report, then your knowledge is wrong 
and belongs to the second category i.e. Viparyaya. Knowledge of 
the Pramdna type may be based partly on one and partly on 
another of these three sources but if it corresponds with facts, it 
belongs to this type. 



SAMADHI PADA 



17 



Viparyayo mithya-jnanam atad-rupa- 
pratistham. 

faWT: wrong knowledge; erroneous impression; mistake; 
delusion fW false; illusory 5rFT«T knowledge; conception a^py 
(of) not its own ^ (real) form srfa^ possessing; occupying; based] 

8. Wrong knowledge is a false conception of a 
thing whose real form does not correspond to such a 
mistaken conception. 

The second type of Vrtti called Viparyaya is also based on some 
kind of contact with an external object but the mental image does 
not correspond with the object. The examples usually given to 
illustrate this kind of Vrtti such as a mirage in a desert may give 
the impression that it i s very rare but this is not a fact. Cases of 
Viparyaya are very frequent. Wherever there is lack of corres- 
pondence between our conception of a thing and the thing itself 
we have really an instance of Viparyaya. But it should be re- 
membered that in Viparyaya we are not concerned with the 
correctness or definiteness of our mental impressions but only with 
the correspondence between the object and the mental image 
formed in our mind. In partial darkness our impression of an 
object may be blurred but if it corresponds with the object it is 
not a case of Viparyaya. 

Sabda-jnananupati-vastu-sunyo vikalpah. 

3T^7 word 5TFT cognizance 3H4ld) following upon cj^| r ^ : 
empty of substance; devoid of objectivity fop^T: fancy. 

9. An image conjured up by words without any 
substance behind it is fancy. 



18 



SECTION I (?, 10) 



The first two categories of mental modifications exhaust all 
kinds of experiences in which there is some kind of contact with 
an object outside the mind. These may therefore be called 
' objective ' in their nature. Now we come to the other two kinds 
of Vrttis in which there is no such contact and the mental image 
is a pure creation of the mind. Here again we have two sub- 
divisions. If the mental modification is based upon a previous 
experience and merely reproduces it we have a case of memory. 
If it is not based upon an actual experience in the past or has 
nothing to correspond to in the field of actual experience but* is a 
pure creation of the mind then it is fancy or imagination. When 
we mentally review the events of our past life such mental modifi- 
cations belong to the realm of memory. When we read a novel 
our Vrttis belong to the realm of fancy. Of course, even in the 
case of fancy the mental images will be found on analysis to be 
derived ultimately from the sensuous perceptions which we have 
actually experienced sometime or other, but the combinations are 
novel and these do not correspond to any actual experience. We 
may imagine a horse with the head of a man. Here the head of 
a man and the body of a horse have been perceived separately 
and belong to the realm of memory but the combination of the 
two in one composite image which does not correspond to an 
actual experience makes the mental image a case of Vikalpa. The 
two categories of memory and fancy on account of the absence of 
any contact with an external object which stimulates the mental 
image may be called ' subjective ' in their nature. 



Abhava-pratyayalambana vrttir nidra. 

3T1TTW absence-; nothingness JRipT content of mind STRT^rTT 
support; basis ; object ^%: modification ftsT sleep. 

10. That modification of the mind which is based 
on the absence of any content in it is sleep. 



SAMADHI PADA 



19 



Of ,J hiS ^u an ,. im P° rtant SStra and should be studied carefully. 
Of course, the hteral meaning of the Sutra is obvious. Even thl 
modxficatxon of the mind in which there is no content in the mxnd 

eason S n S -^\ WhiCh * Callcd ^ ** for a very good 
were a 5^* ^ ^ a ?™™ is in ** •** his mind I, as it 
coic'^f ° r * V ° ld - There is - Pratyaya in the field of 

thTofXT^ „ A? 'J?* ° Utwardlv a PP— to be the same as 
that of Gttta-Vrttt-Mrodha in which also there is complete suppres- 
sion of mental modifications. How does this state then differ from 
the condxtxon of Mrbija-SamadM for the two are poles apart ? Th" 

thf me n nt e a "a 8 ? ■!?/"* *" * *» ^ <*•*** or^eep sLp 
connTctS f ,7 ^ *" St ° P * a "' ° nlv the bra ^ is dis- 

connected from the mmd and so does not record the activities 
whxch are gomg on in the mind. When the person wakes up and 
the contact xs established again, the brain agL becomeTthe seat 
of mental actxvxty as before. When a car if put out of gear the 
engine does not stop, only the effect of th~ „ • ol S ear \ ne 

on thp M , a- the rannm g of the engine 

on t he car dlsa „ and SQ there . s ^ g 

brainT ^ "! *** **** altho -* h there is - Pratyaya m the 
goSon as^f "^7 V™^ to a -btler vehicle and 
goes on as before. Only the brain has been put out of gear 
Experxments xn hypnotism and mesmerism par tty corroborated 

supped anff il iS thC aCtiVity ° f thC mind OT Gitta which » 
ower mental hT If " "^^ t0 St °P thc vibrations ° f the 
nrL Y WhlU W the Wakin S state - ^ the waking state 

c ^rofVhr eC H d Wit , h ^ IOWCr mind and bv strolling the 
When th/ mm , m tHe bTain WC Can contro1 its ^n activity 
moW of ^ SmC ° f " ^ " In gCar ' bv plating or stopping the 
engle £ f I? "n T "**? ° r St °P the ™~ of Z 
slefp and 1; l\ l~ "** therefore that the sta *e of deep 

^^^^^rszt though superficiaiiy th - 



Anubhuta-visayasampramosah smrtih. 



20 SECTION I (U, 12) 

3PTOJT (of) experienced ftgjobject; subject-matter 3jwff*: 
(non-theft) ; not letting go or allowing to escape *J?fa: memory. 

11. Memory is not allowing an object which 
has been experienced to escape. 

The mental process involved in recalling a past experience is 
a peculiar one and the reason why memory is considered as a 
type o£ Citta-Vrtti has already been discussed in dealing with 1-9. 
Memory is here denned as the retention of past experiences in 
the mind. But it is to be noted that these experiences are retained 
in the mind as mere impressions {Samskara) and as long as they 
are present in their potential form, as mere impressions, they 
cannot be considered as a Citta-Vrtti. It is only when the potential 
impressions are converted into their active state in the form of 
mental images that they can properly be considered as a Citta-Vrttu 



v<< 



1W dPvl<tST: I 
Abhyasa-vairagyabhyam tan-nirodhah. 



3T«mr (by) persistent practice tn^TT^Tt (and) non-attach- 
ment or absence of desire or detachment (<R[+ftfl*:) tf^ta: 
control or suppression or inhibition of that {Citta-Vfttis). 

12. Their suppression (is brought about) by 
persistent practice and non-attachment. 

After classifying and explaining the different forms which 
modifications of the mind may assume, the author gives in this 
Sutra the two general means of bringing about the suppression of 
fnte modifications. These are practice and non-attachmen^ 
Two apparently simple words, but what a * emend 7^ ° f 
the hu^an will and variety of practices they stand for Both 
these words have been defined in the ^^V^rf rf^£ 
full significance can be understood only after the study of the 
book has been completed. 



samadhi pAda 

<1 3. 3?r fcqcft *r??ftss2rrcr: i 

Tatra sthitau yatno'bhyasah. 



21 



era - of those (two) faqdl for being firmly established or fixed 
Ic^T: effort; endeavour apu||{|: practice. 

13. Abhyasa is the effort for being firmly establish- 
ed in that state (of Gitta- Vrtti-Nirodhd) . 

What is Abhyasa? All effort directed towards the attainment 
of that transcendent state in which all Citta-Vrttis have been sup- 
pressed and the light of Reality shines uninterruptedly in its 
fullest splendour. The means of attaining this objective are many 
and various and all these may be included in Abhyasa. It is true 
that in the particular system of Toga put forward by Patanjali 
only eight kinds of practices have been included and hence it is 
called Asfdhga-Toga, i.e. Toga with eight component parts. But 
there are other systems of Toga prevalent in the East and each has 
its own particular technique. Many practices are common but 
there are some which are peculiar to each system. Patanjali has 
included in his system practically all those which are essential or im- 
portant. The Togi can adopt any of these according to his needs 
or temperament though he is generally advised to confine himself 
to those practices which are prescribed in the particular school to 
which he belongs. 

It need hardly be pointed out that Toga is an experimental 
science and as in all sciences new techniques are being constantly 
discovered by individual teachers and taught to their disciples. 
Thus each advanced teacher, though he follows the broad princi- 
ples of Toga and techniques of his particular school, imparts a 
personal touch to his teachings by introducing certain minor 
practices of his own. These are generally continued in a more or 
less modified form as long as the school lasts. But in most cases 
such schools quickly degenerate into mere academic bodies carry- 
ing on a dead tradition. 



22 



SECTION I (H) 



Sa tu dirgha-kala-nairantafya-satkarasevito 

d r<Jha-bhumili. 

tf: that 5 indeed <*H; (for) long *FRT time #T??PT (with) 
uninterrupted conti nuance (incessantly) SrPTC (and) reverent 
devotion; earnestness gr^fo^ pursued; practised; followed; 
continued SJS firm ijfr. ground 

14. It {Abhyasa) becomes firmly grounded on 
being continued f Qr a i ong time, without interruption 
and with reverent devotion. 

In order that the practice of Yoga may bear fruit and may 
enable the Sadhaka to be fipnly established on the path there are 
three conditions which mmt be fulfilled . These conditions as 
denned in this Sutra are (1) These prac tices must be continued for , 
a long time. (2) There should be no interruptions. (3) The path ' 
must be trodden with devotion and in a spirit of reverence. The 
necessity for pointing 0ut these condi tions will be seen if one takes 
into account the enorn 10U s number of failures on this path. The 
path of Yoga appears very fascinating in the beginning and many 
are the people who are caug ht by its glamour and make a start 
in the hope of plucking its fruit in a very short time. But alas! 
Of those who enter the path, only a miscroscopical minority are 
able to make good progress. Even those who have the courage 
and perseverance to continue are very few in number. The vast 
majority of a S pi rants drQp Qut SOQner Qr laterj giving up the 
practice completely 0r keeping up a semblance of mere external 
forms as soon as the glamour wears out. They either come to 
believe that it is all « moonshine ' or manage to convince them- 
selves that conditions in the present life are not favourable and 
they had better postpone the effort to the next life when they 
vainly hope to be pi aced in better c i rcumst ances. Leaving out a 
few cases where Karma interposes a real obstacle in the path of 
the aspirant the real cause of discontinuing the practice is, in the 



SAMADHI PADA 



23 



vast majority of cases, the lack of spiritual maturity without which 
no success on this path is possible. The world and its pursuits 
have still a great deal of attraction for such people and they are not 
prepared to make the sacrifices which are demanded on this path. 

Coming back to the essential conditions of success the necessity 
for continuing the practices for a long time is obvious. The nature 
of the changes which have to be brought about in our character, 
mind and vehicles is such that unless the practices are continued 
for a long time no appreciable improvement can be expected. 
Our nature has to be completely changed and the change is so 
fundamental that we must be prepared to continue the work until 
it is finished. How long this will take will depend upon many 
factors: our evolutionary stage, the time we have already given to 
the work in previous lives and the effort that we make in this life. 
Theoretically, if a man is able to surrender himself completely to 
Isvara he can pass into Samadhi immediately, but it is a very big 
' if ' and the Samskdras of the past will not in actual life allow him 
to accomplish suddenly what can be done only after a long and 
strenuous course of discipline. In a few rare cases where the 
progress is extremely rapid there is always the momentum of the 
past, due generally to a number of successive lives devoted to the 
practice of Yoga. So, no one can predict when the final goal will 
be reached and he who enters the path seriously must make up 
his mind to continue not only for a long time but through many 
lives until the goal is reached. He who is ready for treading this 
path is so much absorbed in the fascinating work and has so much 
to do that he has no time to worry as to when he will reach the 
goal. If time hangs heavy on our hands and we are continually 
worrying when success will be ours, it shows lack of real interest 
and is a danger signal. 

To appreciate the requirement of not allowing any interrup- 
tions we have to remember that much of the work in Yoga involves 
bringing about very deep-seated and fundamental changes in the 
various vehicles through which consciousness functions on the 
different planes. And success in bringing about the desired 
changes depends upon continuity of practice. Interruption means 
not only waste of so much time but a considerable sliding back and 
retraversing the same ground which has already been covered. An 



24 



SECTION I (14) 



example will make this clear. Suppose a Sadhaka is trying to 
purify his mind. He has to exclude rigidly from his mind all 
impure thoughts and emotions and to make his mental vehicle or 
Manomaya Kosa vibrate to the highest and purest thoughts until 
the ordinary coarse material of the vehicle has been completely 
replaced by the finest and subtlest matter which can respond to 
only pure and lofty thoughts and emotions. If this is accomplished 
the very vibratory capacity of the vehicle is completely changed 
and it becomes very difficult for the Sadhaka to entertain any 
impure thoughts in the same way as it is difficult for a licentious 
person to entertain pure thoughts. But suppose he gives up the 
effort after making some progress then the original conditions tend 
to reassert themselves gradually, and if he resumes the practice after 
considerable time the process of purification has to start ab initio. 

Most of the required changes in our mind and character 
involve some changes in various vehicles and these latter processes 
which are really material must be almost completed if they are to 
be made practically irreversible. Even in ordinary life this con- 
tinuity of practice is of importance for most undertakings. A boy 
who wants to make himself strong and muscular must take exercise 
regularly. If he does strenuous exercise but gives it up from time 
to time he does not make much progress. Prolonged and steady 
practice is the secret of success in all such undertakings. Even 
interrupted practice gives some advantage and is better than no 
practice at all because it creates favourable Samskaras and thus 
strengthens tendencies in the desired direction but when Yoga is 
taken up seriously uninterrupted practice is essential and every 
new technique which is initiated must be practised continuously 
until it is sufficiently mastered. 

The third condition requiring an attitude of devotion and 
earnestness is equally important. Yoga is a serious business and 
requires intense and whole-hearted application. It cannot be 
pursued as a hobby, one of a number of pursuits in which we are 
equally interested. If a person desires success even in a worldly 
pursuit like science or art he has to give himself completely to his 
work, the more difficult the undertaking the greater the devotion 
it demands. Now, the objective of Yoga is the highest prize of 
human achievement and its pursuit must necessarily be very 



SAMADHI PADA 



25 



exacting in its demand on the time and energy of the Sadhaka. 
That is why in the olden days people who wanted to practise Yoga 
retired into forests so that they could devote themselves com- 
pletely to this task. Complete retirement may not be possible or 
necessary but a whole-hearted devotion to this holy task is abso- 
lutely necessary. Many people think that they can combine the 
pursuit of worldly ambitions with Yogic discipline and glibly cite 
the example of Janaka. But Janaka had already attained the 
ideal of Yoga before he undertook the worldly duties. The ordinary 
Sadhaka especially the beginner who tries to combine the two 
ideals is sure to be swamped by his worldly desires and activities 
and to pursue the path of Yoga merely* in name. Circumstances 
and habits of past lives may not allow the Sadhaka to adopt this 
one-pointed attitude all at once but he must work steadily and 
deliberately towards this end, eliminating one by one all the activ- 
ities and interests which either interfere with his main work or 
uselessly consume his time and energy. This capacity to throw 
oneself whole-heartedly and persistently into the task which the 1 
Sadhaka has placed before himself is a necessary qualification and 
shows the readiness of the soul to embark on the Divine Adventure. 

The word Satkara also implies an attitude of reverence towards 
his task. In pursuing his ideal the Sadhaka is trying to find that 
Ultimate Reality which is the basis and the cause of the whole 
Universe, manifest and unmanifest. This very fact that he is 
trying to unravel the greatest mystery of life should fill him with 
a sense of awe and reverence provided he is conscious of the 
nature of his high purpose and the tremendous nature of the 
Reality which he is approaching. 

When the three conditions mentioned in the Sutra are present, 
progress on the path of Yoga is assured. It may be slow owing to 
inadequate momentum from past lives but the Sadhaka is at least 
firmly established on the path and the attainment of the final goal 
becomes only a question of time. 

T X. ^^FTM fa <=b fa "^ ^ fad^l ¥\ eUHl + KflVll 3<l«J*f I 

Drstanusravika-visaya-vitrsnasya vaslkara- 
samjna vairagyam. 



26 



SECTION I (15) 



^J (for) seen (here in this world) ; visible; physical arpr- 
srf*PF (and) heard; promised in the scriptures; revealed f^T 
objects fad^m of him who has ceased to thirst ^fRnTHsTT 
consciousness of perfect mastery (of desires) tTPT*T non-attach- 
ment; detachment. 

15. The consciousness of perfect mastery (of 
desires) in the case of one who has ceased to crave for 
objects, seen or unseen, is Vairagya. 

This Sutra defines Vairagya the second general means of bring- 
ing about the suppression of Gitta-Vrttis. The full significance of 
Vairagya and its role in bringing the mind to a condition of rest 
will be fully understood only after the study of the philosophy of 
KleJas outlined in Section II. Here we shall discuss only certain 
general principles. The word Vairagya is derived from the word 
Rdga which has been denned in II-7 as the attraction which arises 
due to pleasure derived from any object. Vairagya therefore means 
the absence of any attraction towards objects which give pleasure. 
The question may be asked: why absence of attraction only, 
why not absence of repulsion also, because attraction and repul- 
sion are a pair of opposites and repulsion binds the soul to the 
objects as much as attraction. The reason why Dvesa has 
been left out in the etymological expression of the idea as 
Vairagya is not oversight but the fact that Dvesa is really in- 
cluded in Rdga and forms with it a pair of opposites. The 
alternation of attraction and repulsion between two individuals 
who are attached to each other shows the underlying relation of 
attraction and repulsion and their common derivation from attach- 
ment. So, non-attachment which means freedom from both 
attraction and repulsion correctly expresses the underlying mean- 
ing of Vairagya. 

The reason why Vairagya plays such an important part in 
restraining and then eliminating Citta-Vrttis lies in the fact that 
desire in its two expressions of Rdga and Dvesa is a tremendous 
driving and disturbing force which is incessantly producing Vrttis 
in the mind. In fact, in the earlier stages of evolutionary progress, 



samadhi pada 



27 



desire is the sole driving force and the development of the mind 
takes place almost solely as a result of the constant driving to 
which it is subjected by desire. In the later stages other factors 
also come in and as desire gradually changes into will the latter 
more and more becomes the driving force behind the evolutionary 
development. 

All aspirants who are treading the path of Yoga- roust therefore 
try to understand clearly the role which desire plays in our life 
and the manner in which it keeps the mind in a constant state of 
agitation. Many Sadhakas not realizing sufficiently the disturbing 
influence of desire try to practise meditation without giving suffi- 
cient attention to the problem of controlling desires with the 
result that they do not succeed to any considerable extent in free- 
ing the mind from disturbances at the time of meditation. Trying 
to render the mind calm without eliminating desire is like trying 
to stop the movement of a boat on a surface of water which is 
being violently agitated by a strong wind. However much we 
may try to hold it down in one position by external force it will 
continue to move as a result of the impulses imparted to it by the 
waves. But if the wind dies down and the waves subside com- 
pletely the boat will come to rest^-in time — even without the appli- 
cation of an external force. So is the case with the mind. If the 
driving force of desire is eliminated completely the mind comes to 
rest (Niruddha state) naturally and automatically. The practice of 
Vairagya is the elimination of the driving force of desire using the 
word desire in its widest sense of Vdsand as explained in Section IV. 
But the elimination of Gitta-Vrtti by practising Vairagya alone, 
though theoretically possible, is neither feasible nor advisable. It 
is like trying to stop a car by merely shutting off the supply of gas. 
Why not also apply the brakes and make the car stop more rapidly 
and effectively. Herein comes the role of Abhydsa. Abhydsa and 
Vairagya are therefore jointly utilized for Gitta-Vrlli-Nirodha. After 
this general consideration of the role of Vairagya let us now take 
note of some of the phrases used in 1-15 with a view to under- 
stand the full implication of the definition given therein. 

Visqya are the objects which produce the attraction and 
consequent attachment. They have been divided under two 
heads, those which are seen and those about which we merely 



28 



SECTION I (15) 



hear, i.e. those which are mentioned in scriptures. Anusrauika, of 
course, refers to the enjoyments which the followers of orthodox 
religions expect to gain in the life after death. The practice of 
Vairagya seeks to destroy the thirst for both kinds of enjoyments. 

It will be seen from what has been stated above that the Yogic 
ideal is entirely different from the orthodox religious ideal. In the 
latter, a particular kind of life and conduct are prescribed and if 
the votary of the particular religion conforms to that code of con- 
duct he expects to live after the dissolution of the physical body 
in a superphysical world with all kinds of enjoyments and means 
of happiness. The, heavens of different religions may differ with 
regard to the amenities which they provide but the underlying 
idea is the same, i.e. a particular kind of life which consists in 
following certain observances and moral code ensures a happy 
life in the hereafter. 

The Togic philosophy does not deny the existence of heaven 
and hell but it places before the Yogi an ideal of achievement in 
which the enjoyments and pleasures of heaven life have no place 
because these also are temporary and subject to illusion. The 
enjoyments of the heaven world are nothing as compared with the 
bliss and powers which the Yogi acquires when his consciousness 
passes into the still higher planes of existence. Even these trans- 
cendent states have to be renounced by him in his progress 
towards his ultimate goal. Every power and pleasure which is 
* born ' out of contact with Prakrit and which is not contained in 
the Self and therefore does not make the Yogi self-contained is to 
be included in Anusravika Visaya. 

It may be pointed out here that it is not the feeling of enjoy- 
ment on coming into contact with those Visayas which constitutes 
Trsna. In our contact with objects of senses-some must necessarily 
produce a sensation of pleasure. When consciousness functions 
on the higher planes through the subtler vehicles bliss is the 
natural inevitable accompaniment but it is not this feeling of 
pleasure or bliss which constitutes Raga. It is the attraction and 
consequent attachment which is the cause of bondage and must 
be destroyed by the practice of Vairagya. 

It is also necessary to remember that mere absence of attrac- 
tion due to the inactivity of the body or satiety or preoccupation 



SAMADHI PADA 



29 



with other things does not constitute Vairagya. A man who 
becomes old may lose his sex-desire for the time being. A poli- 
tician engaged in the pursuit of his ambitions may for the time 
being become indifferent to sensuous enjoyments. But this 
temporary indifference towards objects has nothing to do with 
Vairagya. The attraction is merely in abeyance ready to 
come to the surface as soon as the necessary conditions are 
present. What is needed for true Vairagya is the deliberate des- 
truction of all attractions and the consequent attachments and 
conscious mastery over the desires. This is the meaning of the 
phrase VaHkara-Samjna. Control over the vehicles, through which 
the desires are felt and the consciousness of mastery which comes 
from such control are the essential elements of Vairagya. For 
gaining this kind of mastery one should have come in contact with 
temptations of every kind and should have passed through ordeals 
of every description and come out not only triumphant but even 
without feeling the slightest attraction. For, if the attraction is 
felt, even though we may not succumb to the temptation, we have 
not completely mastered the desire. 

It will be seen, therefore, that isolation from the world or 
running away from temptations does not help us in acquiring true 
Vairagya though this may be necessary in the very early stages of 
acquiring self-control. We have to learn the lesson and test our- 
selves in the midst of pleasures and temptations — of course not by 
yielding to temptations and indulging in pleasures, but by trying 
to pierce through the glamorous illusions which surround such 
pleasures while we are under their domination. Real Vairagya is 
not characterized by a violent struggle with our desires. It comes 
naturally and in its most effective form by the exercise of our dis- 
criminative faculty which is called Viveka. Glamour plays a very 
great part in producing Raga or attachment and even ordinary 
intellectual analysis combined with reason and commonsense, can 
free us from many unreasonable habits and attachments. But the 
real weapon to be used in acquiring true Vairagya is the more 
penetrating light of Buddhi which expresses itself as Viveka. As our 
bodies are purified and our mind becomes free from the cruder 
desires this light shines with increasing brightness and destroys our 
attachments by exposing the illusions which underlie them. In fact 



30 



SECTION I (15, 16) 



Viveka and Vairagya may be considered as two aspects of the same 
process of dissipation of illusion through the exercise of discrimi- 
nation on the one hand and renunciation on the other. As the 
process reaches a deeper level it merges more and more in Jfiana 
and becomes almost indistinguishable from it. 

Tat param purusa-khyater gunavaitrsnyam. 

cTcT that qTTT highest; ultimate S^q^ld: by or from aware- 
ness of the Purusa or the Self T<J|4c1<>w-H freedom from the least 
desire for the Gunas. 

16. That is the highest Vairagya in which, on 
account of the awareness of the Purusa, there is cessa- 
tion of the least desire for the Gunas. 

It has been pointed out in connection with the previous Sutra 
that discrimination and renunciation mutually strengthen each 
other and bring about progressively the destruction of illusions 
and attachments which are the root cause of bondage. This 
results in the release of consciousness from fetters which bind it to 
the lower worlds and the whole process culminates as we shall see 
later in Kaivalya, the final objective of Toga. In that state the 
Purusa having realized his true nature and having shaken off the 
yoke of matter has no attraction left even for the subtlest kinds of 
bliss experienced on the highest planes of existence. He is com- 
pletely self-sufficient and above all such attractions which are 
based on the play of the Gunas. This Vairagya which is based 
upon the destruction of Avidya and the realization that everything 
is contained in the Purusa himself or the Purusa is the source of 
everything is the highest kind of Vairagya and is called Para- 
Vairagya. It will be seen that this Para-Vairagya which is a 
characteristic of the Purusic consciousness — if this word can be 
used — can appear only on the attainment of Kaivalya. 

The fact that complete Vairagya develops only on the attain- 
ment of Purusa-Khyati means that though there may be no active 



SAMADHI PADA 



31 



attachment in the.lower stages, still, the seeds of attachment remain. 
This means, that while there is the possibility of attachment 
developing again before Purusa-Khyati is attained no such possi- 
bility exists after this stage is reached. This fact has also been 
expressed very well in the Bhagavad-GIta in the well-known Sloka 
(11-59). " The objects of sense, but not the relish for them, turn 
away from an abstemious dweller in the body; and even relish 
turneth away from him after the Supreme is seen ". 

Vitarka-vicaranandasmitanugamat sam- 
prajfiatah. 

Pld+ (of) reasoning; argumentation f^TT deliberation ; reflec- 
tion 3IM«i bliss; joy Sif^-Hd I (and; or) I-am-ness; sense of 
individuality; sense of pure being 3PTTTRT by accompaniment; 
with association *in?lid: Samadhi with Prajnd or consciousness. 

17. Samprajndta Samadhi is that which is accom- 
panied by reasoning, reflection, bliss and sense of pure 
being. 

1-17 and 1-18 deal with the two varieties of Samadhi called 
Samprajndta and AsamprajUdta. Before we take up for discussion 
these two important Sutras it is desirable that we deal in a general 
way with the nature of Samadhi and the mutual relationship of the 
different kinds and stages of Samadhi which are mentioned in the 
Toga-Sutras. This will make it easier for the student to tackle this 
very difficult though fascinating subject and enable him to see its 
different aspects in their true relationship. The subject of Samadhi 
is too often studied in a haphazard and disjointed manner without 
making any effort to view its different parts in their correct 
perspective. 

As the Sutras bearing on the different aspects of Samadhi are 
scattered in the Toga-Sutras at different places it will help the 
student if a brief analysis of these Sutras is given here and the order, 



32 



SECTION I (17) 



in which they should be studied by the "beginner, pointed out. 
The manner in which the subject of Samddhi is treated in the 
Toga-Sutras may appear rather strange to the student. He should 
remember, however, that these Sutras are meant to provide in a 
very condensed form all the essential knowledge for the advanced 
student of Toga and not to serve as an introduction for the 
beginner who has yet to learn the A.B.C. of the subject. That 
is why Patanjali allows himself to plunge into a discussion of the 
more abstruse aspects of Samddhi in Section I and deals with 
the different stages of concentration leading upto Samadhi 4n 
Section III. This manner of treating a difficult subject must 
appear very confusing to the modern student for whom the condi- 
tions for understanding any subject are made as easy as possible. 
If, therefore, the student is new to the subject and his ideas about 
Samadhi and related subjects are not quite clear it would perhaps 
be better for htm to take up the Sutras bearing on Samddhi in the 
following order: 



Samadhi 

(1) The three stages of meditation 

leading upto Samddhi 

(2) Samprajhdla and Asamprajndta 

Samddhi 

(3) The essential process involved 

in Sabija Samadhi 

(4) The different phases of 

Sabija Samddhi 

(5) The technique of 

Nirbija Samddhi 

(6) The three kinds of transformations 

involved in Samddhi 



111-1,2, 3; 4 

1-17, 18 

1-41 

1-42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 
47, 48, 49, 50 

1-51, III-8, IV-26, 
27, 28, 29 

III-9, 10, 11, 12 



Samddhi may be defined generally as a process of diving into 
the deeper layers of one's consciousness which functions through 
different grades of the mind. Consciousness is an aspect of the 
Ultimate Reality in manifestation and its expression depends upon 



SAMADHI PADA 



33 



the particular grade of the mind through which it is functioning, 
the coarser the medium the more limited the expression. As the 
progressive involution of consciousness in matter for the purpose 
of its unfoldment imposes upon it increasing limitations, so the 
reverse process of evolution progressively releases consciousness 
from these limitations. The different stages of Samddhi represent 
this progressive release of consciousness from the limitations in 
which it is involved and Kaivalya is that state in which it can 
again function in perfect freedom. 

As consciousness functions at different levels in different grades 
of the mind through different mechanisms which are called 
vehicles or Kosas its progressive release from limitations may be 
looked at from another point of view. It may be considered as its 
withdrawal from one vehicle into a subtler vehicle. Each vehicle 
has its own functions and limitations but the functions become 
more inclusive and the limitations more tenuous as the matter of 
which it is composed becomes more refined. This progressive 
withdrawal of consciousness in Samddhi into increasingly subtler 
vehicles is represented in the diagram showing ' Stages of Samadhi '. 
The diagram is self-explanatory but can be understood fully only 
when the different aspects of Samddhi have been studied in detail. 

The first aspect of Samddhi with which Patanjali deals in the 
first Section is the distinction between Samprajndta and Asampra- 
jndta Samddhi. There is a lot of misunderstanding with regard to 
the nature of these two kinds of Samddhi and many students con- 
fuse them with Sabija and Nirbija Samddhi. In fact the words 
used for different kinds of "Samddhis are generally used by com- 
mentators in a haphazard manner and the subtler distinctions 
which characterize the different kinds and phases of Samddhi are 
frequently overlooked. A student of the Toga-Sutras should bear 
in mind that this is a scientific treatise in which each word has a 
specific and definite meaning and there is no possibility of loose- 
ness of expression or the use of alternate words for the same idea. 
When Patanjali uses two pairs of words — Samprajndta and Asam- 
prajndta on the one hand and Sabija and Nirbija on the other — in 
entirely -different contexts it is because he is dealing with two 
entirely different ideas or subjects and to take these two pairs of 
words as if they mean the same thing shows lack of comprehension 
3 



34 



SECTION I (17) 



of the whole subject. We shall discuss later the significance of 
Sabija and Nirbija Samadhis. Let us first try to understand what 
Samprajndta and Asamprajndta Samadhis mean. 

As frequently happens in the use of Samskrta words the clue 
to the meaning of a particular word is given by the etymological 
structure of the word. Samprajndta Samddhi means ' Samddhi with 
Prajna '. The prefix A in Samskrta means ' not ' and therefore 
Asamprajndta Samddhi means ' not the Samddhi with Prajna '. Asam- 
prajndta Samddhi is therefore not the Samddhi without Prajna, which 
would be the opposite of Samprajndta Samddhi. It is a state of 
Samddhi which, though associated with Prajna, is yet different from 
Samprajndta Samddhi. It may therefore be considered a correlative 
of Samprajndta Samddhi. The word Prajna in Samskrta stands for 
the higher consciousness working through the mind in all its 
stages. It is derived from Pra which means high and Jria. which 
means to ' know '. The distinctive characteristic of this higher 
consciousness which unfolds in Samddhi is that the mind is cut off 
completely from the physical world and the consciousness is centred 
in one or the other of the set of vehicles beginning with the lower 
mental body and ending with the Atmic vehicle. The consciousness 
is thus free from the burden and interference of the physical brain. 

If both Samprajndta and Asamprajndta Samadhis are associated 
with Prajna (Samprajna) where lies the difference between the two? 
The difference lies in the presence or absence of a Pratyaya in the 
field of consciousness. Pratyaya is a technical word used in Toga 
to denote the total content of the mind at any moment using the 
word mind in its widest sense and not merely the intellect. This 
Pratyaya may be of any kind and may exist on any plane of the 
mind. A mental image of a child, a concept of a mathematical 
principle, an all-embracing vision of the Unity of life are all 
Pratyayas of different kinds and belonging to different planes. 

Now, in SamprajHdta Samddhi there is a Pratyaya (which is called 
a ' seed ') in the field of consciousness and the consciousness is 
fully directed to it. So the direction of consciousness is from the 
centre outwards. In Asamprajndta Samadhi there is no Pratyaya and 
therefore there is nothing to draw the consciousness outwards and 
hold it there. So as soon as the Pratyaya (P) is dropped or 
suppressed the consciousness begins to recede automatically to its 



SAMADHI PADA 



35 



centre O and after passing momentarily through this Laya centre, 
tends to emerge into the next subtler vehicle. When this process 
has been completed the Pratyaya (P') of the next higher plane 
appears and the direction of consciousness again becomes from the 
centre Outwards. The progressive stages of the recession of con- 
sciousness to its centre and its emergence into the next higher 
plane may be illustrated by the following diagram: 



•»-* 





J L 



»->• 



J L 




SAMPRAJNATA ASAMPRAJNATA SAMADHI SAMPRAJNATA 

SAMADHI SAMADHI 

Fio. 1 

From the time the Pratyaya P is suppressed to the time when the 
Pratyaya P' of the next plane appears the Yogi is in the stage of 
Asamprajndta Samddhi. During all this time he is fully conscious 
and his will is directing this delicate mental operation in a very 
subtle manner. The mind is no doubt blank but it is the blank- 
ness of Samddhi and not the blankness of an ordinary kind such 
as is present in deep sleep or coma. The mind is still completely 
icut off from the outer world, is still perfectly concentrated, is still 
under complete control of the will. Asamprajndta Samddhi there- 
fore represents a very dynamic condition of the mind and differs 
from Samprajndta Samddhi only in the absence of Pratyaya in the 
field of consciousness. In intensity of concentration and alertness 
of the mind it is on a par with Samprajndta Samadhi. That is why 
it is denoted by merely adding the prefix A to Samprajndta Samadhi. 
The void of Asamprajndta Samddhi is sometimes called a ' cloud ' 
in Yogic terminology and the experience may be compared to that 
of a pilot whose aeroplane passes through a cloud bank. The 
clear landscape is blotted out suddenly, the ordinary sense of 
direction disappears and he flies on in the certainty that if he holds 
on he is bound to come out again into the clear sky. When the 
consciousness of the Yogi leaves one plane and the Pratyaya of 



36 



SECTION I (17) 



that plane disappears he finds himself in a void and must remain 
in that void until his consciousness automatically emerges into the 
next plane with its new and characteristic Pratyaya. He cannot do 
anything but wait patiently, \vith mind concentrated and alert, 
for the darkness to disperse and the light of the higher plane to 
dawn in his mind. In the case of the advanced Yogi this experi- 
ence can be repeated over and over again and he passes from one 
plane to another until he takes the final plunge from the subtlest 
plane (the Atmic plane) into Reality itself — the consciousness of 
the Purusa. The ' cloud ' which he now enters is called Dhar'ma 
Megha for reasons discussed in dealing with IV-29. When he 
comes out of this sacred ' cloud ' he has already left behind the 
realm of Prakrti and is in his own Svarupa. 

It will be seen, therefore, that in the progressive recession of 
consciousness from the lower mental plane to its origin Samprajndta 
Samadhi with its characteristic Pratyaya and Asamprajndta Samadhi 
with its void follow each other in succession until the last hurdle 
has been crossed and the Yogi is established in his Svarupa and his 
■consciousness has become one with the consciousness of the 
Purusa. The recession of consciousness towards its centre is thus 
not a steady and uninterrupted sinking into greater and greater 
depths but consists in this alternate outward and inward move- 
ment of consciousness at each barrier separating the two planes. 

The time taken for passage through the different planes and 
the intervening voids depends upon the advancement of the Yogi. 
While the beginner may remain entangled on the lower planes for 
a considerable time extending to years, the advanced Yogi can 
transfer his consciousness from one plane to another with lightning 
rapidity, and in the case of the Adept who has attained Kaivalya 
all the planes really merge into one because the passage up or 
down is so swift and easy that it is merely a question of focussing 
consciousness in one vehicle or another. As a rule, when the 
Yogi is still learning the technique of Samadhi. he. has to spend 
considerable time on a particular plane in studying its phenomena 
and laws before he is in a position to attempt passage into the 
next higher plane. His progress depends not only on his present 
effort but also on the momentum of the past and the Samskdras 
which he brings from his previous lives. The Science of Toga 



SAMADHI PADA 



37 



cannot be mastered in one life but only in a succession of strenuous 
lives devoted exclusively to the Yogic ideal. And those who are 
impatient and cannot adopt this long term view are not yet quali- 
fied to enter this path and make steady progress towards their goal. 
After dealing with the nature of Samprajndta and Asamprajndta 
Samadhi in a general way let us now consider the two Sutras in 
which Patafijali has referred to these aspects of Samadhi. In 1-17 
he hints at the characteristics of the consciousness which unfolds 
in the four stages of Samprajndta Samadhi which correspond to the 
four stages of the Gunas mentioned in 11-19. The word Anugamdt 
means ' associated with ' or ' accompanied by ' and the Sutra 
therefore broadly means that the four successive phases or stages 
of Samprajndta Samadhi are accompanied by the activities or states 
of the mind which are denoted by Vitarka, Vicdra, Ananda and 
Asmitd respectively. Anyone who is familiar with the old Veddntic 
classification or the modern Theosophical classification of the 
planes of manifestation and the functions of vehicles on those 
planes will easily see how closely this progressive unfoldment of 
consciousness through the four stage* mentioned in the Sutra cor- 
responds with this classification. The classification of the elements 
which constitute the phenomenal side of the Universe according 
to Sdmkhya and Yogic philosophies is functional and not structural 
and that is obviously the reason why Patafijali in denoting the 
successive stages of SamprajndtA Samadhi has given only the essential 
and dominant functions of the mind and not the names of the 
vehicles through which these functions are exercised. There is 
something to be said in favour of this functional representation of 
these stages as compared with the structural. While it certainly 
appears vague and difficult to understand it has the advantage of 
being independent of any particular mode of classifying the planes 
and the terminology adopted for denoting them. Besides, the 
Yogi who is following the path of myticism and is bent on finding 
his Beloved may not be interested in the constitution and pheno- 
mena of the different planes and may not like to study these planes 
objectively. A simple functional treatment of the different stages 
of SamprajMta Samadhi should therefore meet the needs of most 
people who are practising Yoga. But as a constitutional treatment 
has the great advantage of clarifying in a remarkable manner the 



38 



SECTION I (17) 



whole technique of Yoga there is no reason why we should not 
take advantage of the knowledge which vs available to us. 

In the following, diagram are shown the different stages of 



5 is 



23 



-35 

o 



O v» 



DHARANA 

DHYANA 

SAMADHI 



• < 

13 



*< 



l< 



[.<■ 



3 

UJ 

I 



55 

< 



Q 



CD 



i 



!■<> 






X 
Q 

< 

< 

< 

'5 
< 
to 




SAMPRAJNATA-VITARKA 



savitarka 
[nirvitafka 



«— 7 ASAMPRAJNATA 



SAMPRAJNATA-VICARaJ^vcIra 




y ASAMPRAJNATA 



SAM PRAJNATA-SANAN DA 






-y ASAMPRAJNATA 



SAMPRAJNATA -SASMITA 



NIRBUA SAMADHI 



DHARMA-MEC.HA-SAMADHI 



STAGES ofSAMADHI 



SAMADHI PADA 



39 



Samprajnata and Asamprajndta Samadhi as well as their correspond- 
ences to the different vehicles and other aspects of the question 
involved in our study. It will be seen that Samprajnata Samadhi 
begins when the consciousness is completely cut off from the outer 
world after passing through the two preliminary stages of Dkdrana 
and Dhydria. In the first stage of Samprajnata Samadhi the conscious- 
ness is therefore centred in the lower mental world and func- 
tions through the Manomaya Kos'a. The essential function of the 
mind in this stage is denoted by the word Vitarka. It should be 
noted that when a person can leave the physical body and function 
in the two subtler vehicles called astral or lower mental body he 
is not necessarily in a state of Samadhi though his physical body is 
in an inert condition. He may be merely functioning in these 
subtler bodies in the ordinary manner exercising his clairvoyant 
powers and bringing down the knowledge he has gained into the 
physical brain when he returns to the physical body. This state 
in which clairvoyance, etc. can be exercised is quite different 
from the state of Samadhi because the peculiar condition of 
the mind described in III-3 is not present. The mind is directed 
to different objects in succession and is not concentrated upon 
one object. 

After mastering the technique of Savitarka and Nirvitarka 
phases in the first stage the Yogi practises Asamprajndta Samadhi and 
withdraws his consciousness into the next higher plane, passing 
through the ' cloud ' which accompanies Asamprajndta Samadhi. The 
consciousness of the Yogi then emerges into the higher mental 
world and functions through the VijHdnamaya Kos'a or the causal 
body. The essential function of the mind working through this 
vehicle is called Vicdra. The Yogi now starts practising Samadhi 
on this plane, slowly masters the technique of the Savicdra and 
Nirvicdra phases and again practises AsarnprajHdta Samadhi to free 
his consciousness from the higher mental plane. The whole cyclic 
process has to be repeated twice again during the last two stages 
, of Samprajnata Samadhi in order to release the consciousness of the 
Yogi, from the extremely subtle and hardly comprehensible vehicles 
which are called the Anandamaya Kos'a and Atmd and whose essen- 
tial functions are called Ananda and Asmitd. The significance 
of the words Vitarka, Vicdra, Ananda and Asmitd is explained in 



40 



SECTION I (17) 



dealing with the four stages of the Gunas in 11-19 and the student 
should refer to that Sutra in this connection. 

The student should also note that throughout the recession of 
consciousness in the four stages there is always something in the 
field of consciousness. It is true that during the period of 
AsamprajMta Samadhi there is no Pratyaya but only a .' cloud ' or 
void but a * cloud ' or void is also a cover on pure consciousness. 
It is only the blurred impression produced in consciousness when 
it passes through the critical phase between the Pratyaya of two 
successive planes. This phase is like the critical state between twcr 
states of matter, liquid and gaseous, when it can be called neither 
liquid nor gaseous. So this presence of a Pratyaya which is charac- 
teristic of all stages of Samprajnata Samadhi means that in Sam- 
prajnata Samadhi consciousness can only know the nature of some- 
thing which is placed within its field of illumination. It cannot 
know its own nature. If we pass a beam of light through a dark 
chamber and then place in the path of the beam different kinds of 
objects the light will immediately illuminate those objects and 
enable us to see them. The objects are seen with the help of the 
light but we cannot see the light itself, for if all the objects are 
removed from the path pf the beam of light the chamber will 
become quite dark although the beam of light is still there. Is 
there a means of seeing the light itself? There is no means of 
seeing physical light apart from the objects which it illuminates. 
But the light of consciousness can be seen as it really is after all 
the stages of Samprajnata Samadhi have been passed and Nirbija 
Samadhi is practised to remove the final and the subtlest veil cover- 
ing Reality, the consciousness of the Purusa. 

We have been referring to the Pratyayas of the different 
planes and the student might like to know what these Pratyayas are 
like. Although efforts have been made to describe the glorious 
and vivid Pratyayas of the higher planes by mystics and occultists 
in all ages those who read these descriptions can see that these 
efforts are a failure, the higher the plane which is sought to be 
depicted the more complete the failure. The fact is that it is 
impossible to have any idea of these higher planes except in the 
most general and vaguest manner. Each world can be known 
only through the vehicle which consciousness uses in that world. 



SAMADHI PADA 



41 



The successive descent of consciousness into the lower worlds is 
not like a progressive and general dimming of a brilliant light by 
a number of covers. Each successive descent involves a decrease 
in the number of dimensions of space and time and this imposes 
at each step additional limitations on consciousness which are 
inherent in the working of that plane. 

In some of the subsequent Sutras the nature of the different 
kinds otSamadhis is further elaborated. But it will be seen that no 
attempt is made anywhere to describe the experiences of the 
higher planes. The knowledge which these Sutras give is like the 
knowledge derived from the study of the map of a country. A 
map does not give us any idea regarding the landscapes, scenery, 
etc. of a country. It can merely give us information regarding 
the relative positions and contour of different parts of the country. 
If we want really to know the country we must go and see it 
ourselves. So if we want to know what these higher planes are 
like we must practise Samadhi and come into direct touch with 
them through their respective vehicles. And even when we have 
seen those planes ourselves we are unable to give to others any 
idea about them. Such knowledge is always direct and incom- 
municable. 



< \^. feKJ^MCH^i^m^*: 



TS*f: I 



Virama-pratyayabhyasa-purvah samskara- 
seso'nyah. 

\4<\H cessation; dropping JT^PT content of the mind (the 
' seed ' of Samprajnata Samadhi) srnmr practice -^t: preceded by 
ty't<t>K impressions 3PT: remnant 3PT: the other. 

18. The remnant impression left in the mind on 
the dropping of the Pratyaya after previous practice is 
the other (i.e., Asamprajnata Samadhi). 

The nature of Asamprajnata Samadhi is defined in this Sutra. 
The meaning of the Sutra should be clear to some extent in the 



42 



SECTION I (18) 



SAMADHI PADA 



43 



light of what has been said already in connection with the pre- 
vious Sutra. Let us dwell for a while on the various phrases used 
in this Sutra. Virdma-Pratyaya means ' the cessation of Pratyaya'. 
This of course refers to the < seed ' of Samprajndta Samadhi which is 
dropped and disappears from the field of consciousness in the 
practice of Asamprajnata Samadhi. Some commentators interpret 
this phrase as ' the idea of cessation ' or ' the cause of cessation- . 
This would mean that the Yogi meditates on the idea of cessation 
of Pratyaya or on Para-Vairdgya. This interpretation does not seem 
to be justified in the present context and if analysed carefully wrtl 
be seen to mean nothing but the dropping of the < seed ' held in 
the preceding Samprajndta Samadhi. A Togi who is meditating on a 
' seed ' can drop it with the production of a void state of the mind 
but he cannot leave the ' seed ' of Samprajndta Samadhi and start 
meditating on the idea of cessation. Anyone can see that such a 
switch over from one idea to another of an entirely different 
nature in the state of Samadhi is impossible. 

Abhyasa Puruab means ' preceded by practice '. Practice of 
what? Practice of holding in the mind the ' seed ' of Samprajndta 
Samadhi. This phrase therefore serves to emphasize the fact that 
Asamprajnata Samadhi can be practised only after the prolonged 
practice of Samprajndta Samadhi. It is, as has been pointed out 
already, an intensely active and not a passive condition. In fact 
the recession of consciousness in Asamprajnata Samadhi and its passage 
through the Laya centre depends upon the continuance of the con- 
stant pressure of the will which is at the back of the effort to keep 
the mind in the state of Samprajndta Samadhi. There is no change 
in this condition of the mind except the disappearance of the 
Pratyaya. The pressure must be built up in Samprajndta Samadhi 
before it can be utilized in Asamprajnata Samadhi. The bow must 
be drawn before the arrow is released to pierce through the target. 
Samskara Sesah means ' the remnant impression '. The impres- 
sion which is left in the mind after the Pratyaya of one plane has 
been/ dropped, and before the Pratyaya of the next plane appears 
can under normal conditions only be void. But this void is not a 
static state although it may be felt to be so by the Yogi when he is 
passing through it. It is a dynamic condition because conscious- 
ness is being slowly or quickly transferred from one plane to 



V' 



another as shown in Fig. 1 . Consciousness cannot remain suspended 
indefinitely in a void. It must emerge on one of the two sides of 
the Laya centre. If the technique of Nirodha Parindma has not 
been mastered sufficiently it may spring back into the plane which 
it has just left and the ' seeds ' which had been dropped will then 
reappear. But if the mind can remain in the Niruddha state for a 
sufficiently long time as indicated in 111-10, consciousness will 
emerge sooner or later into the next higher plane. 

There are two other interesting points which may be discussed 
briefly before we leave the subject of Asamprajnata Samadhi. One 
is the nature of the point O (Figure No. 1) through which con- 
sciousness passes from one plane to another. This point which 
has been called the Laya centre is the common centre in which all 
the vehicles of the Jivdtmd may be said to be centred. It is only 
through such a centre which is called a ttindu in Samskrta that 
transference of consciousness from one plane to another can take 
place. 

As a matter of fact there is only the centre of Reality sur- 
rounded by a number of concentric vehicles and whichever vehicle 
is illuminated by consciousness derives its illumination from that 
centre. But the concentration of consciousness in a particular 
vehicle makes it appear as if the consciousness is moving up and 
down along the line or point which connects all the vehicles. An 
Adept whose consciousness is permanently centred on the Atmic 
plane focusses his attention temporarily in any particular vehicle 
and for the time being the objects connected with that vehicle 
come within the field of his consciousness. The centre of his con- 
sciousness thus appears to have moved into one vehicle or another 
but in reality it has not moved at all. Consciousness which is all 
the time centred in Reality has merely been focussed in one vehicle 
or another. It is in this particular sense that the transference of 
consciousness from one vehicle to another in Samadhi must be 
understood if we are not to become involved in the philosophical 
absurdity of imagining consciousness which transcends Time and 
Space moving from one place to another. 

The second point which the student may note in this connec- 
tion is that the common centre of all vehicles being the meeting 
point of all the planes, consciousness must always be withdrawn 



44 



SECTION I (18, 19) 



to this before it can be transferred to another vehicle, just as a 
person going along one road must return to the crossing before he 
can take to another road. Asamprajndta Samadhi will be thus seen 
to be nothing but this withdrawal of consciousness to its Laya 
centre before it can begin to function on another plane. If the 
consciousness remains permanently established in the centre of 
Reality as it is in the case of a highly advanced Adept the question 
of withdrawing it to the centre does not arise. From this vantage- 
ground he commands an all-embracing view of all the lower 
planes and can instantaneously begin to function on any plane" 
he likes. 

The question may be asked why if this common centre of all 
vehicles is also the centre of Reality within each Yogi, he does not 
get a glimpse of Reality in passing through jt from one plane to 
another. The possibility of such a glimpse certainly exists on 
account of the unique nature of this point. What then prevents 
the Yogi from touching Reality every time he practises Asamprajndta 
Samadhi ? The answer to this question is contained in some of the 
Sutras occurring in the latter portion of Section IV. It is the 
Samskaras still burdening the Yogi's mind which obscure his vision 
and prevent him from obtaining a glimpse of Reality. These 
Samskaras must be destroyed completely before he is free to pass 
into the realm of Reality from whatever point he wills. But 
though the Yogi, still burdened with Samskaras, cannot gain a clear 
glimpse of Reality, he can sense, as it were, the Reality more and 
more as he makes progress towards his goal and the burden of his 
Samskaras becomes lighter. Viewed in this manner every succes- 
sive Asamprajndta Samadhi is a precursor of Nirbija Samadhi which 
alone gives an unobstructed vision of Reality. 

Bhava-pratyayo videha-prakrtilayanam. 

Wf (by) birth; objective existerifce -Mc*W caused fa^T the 
' bodiless ' &r$f<M4MIH of the e merged-in-Prakrti '; of the 
absorbed in Prakrti. 



SAMADHI PADA 



45 



19. Of those who are Videhas and Prakrtilqyas 
birth is the cause. 



This Sutra and the next are meant to differentiate between 
two kinds of Yogis. The first kind of Yogis referred to in 11-19 are 
called Videhas and Prakrtilqyas and their trance is not the result of 
the regular self-discipline outlined in the Yoga-Sutras. It depends 
upon their e birth ', that is, they possess the capacity to pass into 
trance naturally without any effort as a result of their peculiar 
physical and mental constitution. In the case of the second kind 
of Yogis their Samadhi is the result of regular practice of Yoga which 
requires certain high traits of character like faith, energy, etc. 
mentioned in 1-20. While the meaning of 1-20 is quite clear and 
obvious the interpretation of 1-19 has become involved in confusion 
on account of the different meanings associated with the words 
Bhava, Videha and Prakrtilaya by different commentators. Let us, 
therefore, see whether it is not possible to find a reasonable inter- 
pretation of this Sutra based on experience and commonsense 
rather than on far-fetched meanings which merely cause confusion. 

The first point to note in the interpretation of this Sutra is that 
it points out a class of Yogis in contra-distinction to the class of 
Yogis referred to in 1-20. What are the characteristics of the Yogis 
described in 1-20 ? In their case the state of Samadhi or enlighten- 
ment is preceded by faith, energy, memory, high intelligence, in 
other words, it is the result of the possession by the Yogi of those 
essential traits of character which are needed in any high endeav- 
our. The true Yogis of this class achieve their objective in the 
normal manner by adopting the usual means outlined in the 
Yoga-Sutras. It follows therefore that the Yogis of the other class 
mentioned in 1-19 do not owe their Yogic faculties and powers, 
whatever they may be, to the adoption of the usual means. Their 
faculties and powers come to them in an abnormal manner. This 
is the important point which gives a clue to the meaning of the 
Sutra. 

Who are the Yogis who happen to possess Yogic faculties and 
powers without adopting the usual means? Anyone who moves 
among people possessing these faculties or powers is likely to come 



46 



SECTION I (19) 



across some cases in which these powers and faculties are not at 
all the result of Togic practice in this life but appear during the 
course of their life naturally without any considerable effort on 
their part. Such people are born with such faculties or powers, a 
fact which is also corroborated by IV-1, ' birth ' being mentioned 
in that Sutra as one of the means of acquiring Siddhis. The 
Samskrta word Bhava has also the connotation of ' to happen ' 
which further strengthens the idea of the accidental nature of the 
presence of these faculties. Of course, there is nothing really 
accidental in the Universe which is governed by natural laws in 
every sphere. Everything that happens is the result of causes 
known or unknown, and the fortuitous appearance of psychic 
powers is no exception to this Law (see IV-1). 

The question now arises who are the Videhas and Prakrtilayas, 
the two classes of people in whom these psychic powers appear 
without any apparent cause? The word Videha literally means the 
' bodiless ' and Prdkrtilaya means ' merged-in-Prakrti '. Some com- 
mentators have given meanings to these words which appear to be 
far-fetched and unjustifiable in the context in which the Sutra is 
placed. Videhas most probably refers to the large number of 
psychics scattered throughout the world who are mediumistic by 
nature. A medium is a person with a peculiar physical constitu- 
tion, the peculiarity consisting in the ease with which the dense 
physical body can be partially separated from the etheric double 
or the Pranamaya JCoJa. It is this peculiarity which enables the 
medium to pass into trance and to exercise some psychic powers. 
The word Videha probably owes its origin to this peculiarity of 
being capable of becoming partially ' disembodied ', the peculiarity 
which is generally accompanied by the capacity to exercise psychic 
faculties of a spurious kind. 

In the same way Prakrtilayas are not high class Yogis who 
have obtained some kind of Moksa as suggested by some commen- 
tators. On the other hand they are \>se\ido-Yogis who have the 
capacity to pass into a kind of passive state or trance which out- 
wardly resembles Samadhi but is not real Samddhi. Such a Samadhi 
is called Jada-Samadhi. In real Samadhi the Togi's consciousness 
becomes merged more and more first in the Universal Mind and 
then in the Universal Consciousness which is Gaitanya. How can 



SAMADHI PADA 



47 



those who are merged in Prakrti which is Jada be considered high 
class Yogis? Such pseud o- Yogis are found in large numbers and 
undoubtedly possess some capacity to reflect the higher conscious- 
ness in their vehicles. But such powers as they possess are not 
under their control and the consciousness which they bring down 
is blurred giving them at best a sense of peace and strength and a 
vague realization of the Great Mystery hidden within them. These 
powers are undoubtedly due to Samskdras brought forward from 
previous lives in which they have practised Yoga bitt also done 
something to forfeit the right to make further progress for the 
time being. These Samskdras give them a peculiar constitution of 
the lower vehicles but not the will and capacity to tread the 
regular path of Yoga. It is only in the case of the true Yogis 
referred to in the next Sutra that these qualifications are present. 

The interpretation of the Sutra as given above is at complete 
variance with those given by the well-known orthodox commen- 
tators. If it has no authority to back it, it has at least the advan- 
tage of being based on commonsense and facts of experience. If 
we take into account the context of the Sutra it is apparent that 
the Yogis referred to in this Sutra are of the pseudo variety and 
inferior to those who tread the normal path of Yoga outlined in 
the Yoga-Sutras. In fact, it is probably to help the neophyte to 
avoid confusion on this subject that Patanjali has pointed out this 
distinction. Whether Patanjali actually meant the class of pseudo- 
Yogis mentioned above, when he used the words Videhas and 
Prakrtilayas it is difficult to say with certainty and in view of the 
theoretical nature of the question is not of much consequence. 

\o. ^ 4 1 «fl 4<rH Pd*i H I fa M ?1 1.^4+ WW I 

Sraddha-viiya-smrti-samadhi-prajnapur- 
vaka itaresam. 



*T^T faith ^fcj indomitable energy or will &lfo memory 
*t *iiffct>nii (and) intelligence or ' high knowledge ' or keen intellect 
essential for Samadhi -^PF: preceded by ^cl^lH for others; of 
others. 



48 SECTION I (20) 

^ 20. (In the case) of others {Upqya-PratyUya Togis) 
it is preceded by faith, energy, memory and high 
intelligence necessary for Samadhi. 



In the case of the true Yogis, in contra-distinction to pseudo- 
Togis referred to in the previous Sutra the attainment of various 
progressive states of consciousness in Samadhi is preceded by the 
presence in the Sadhaka of certain traits of character which are 
essential for the attainment of a high spiritual ideal. Patanjal'i has 
mentioned only four such traits in the Sutra but the list is not 
necessarily meant to be exhaustive and each trait which has been 
mentioned implies far more than the literal meaning of the word. 
The essential idea which the author obviously means to emphasize 
and which the student should try to grasp is that the attainment 
of the true Yogic ideal is the culmination of a long and severe pro- 
cess of character-building and discipline for the unfoldment of 
our powers and faculties from within, and not the result of chance, 
stunts, and favours bestowed by anyone or the following of any 
cheap methods of self-culture in a haphazard manner. This 
warning is necessary in view of the hidden desire in a very large 
numbejr of aspirants to enjoy the fruits of Yogic practice without 
undergoing the necessary training and discipline. Instead of taking 
to the true path of Yoga and trying to develop in themselves the 
necessary qualifications, they are always after easy methods and 
new teachers who they hope will be able to bestow on them 
Siddhis, etc. as favours. 

The four qualifications given by Patanjali are faith, indomit- 
able energy or will, memory and the keen intelligence essential for 
Samadhi. Faith is the firm conviction regarding the presence of 
the Truth we seek within us and the efficacy of Yogic technique in 
enabling us to reach the goal. It is not ordinary belief which can 
be shaken by contrary arguments or repeated failures but that 
state of inner certainty which is present where a purified mind is 
irradiated by the light of Buddhi or spiritual intuition. Without 
this kind of faith it is impossible for anyone to persevere through 
many lives which are needed by the ordinary aspirant to accom- 
plish the object of Yogic discipline. 



SAMADHI PADA 



49 



The word Virya in Samskrta cannot be translated by any one 
word in English. It combines in itself the connotations of energy, 
determination, courage, all aspects of an indomitable will which 
ultimately overcomes all obstacles and forces its way to the desired 
goal. Without this trait of character it is not possible for anyone 
to make the almost superhuman effort which is required in going 
through the Yogic discipline to the end. 

The word Smrti is not used here in its ordinary psychological 
sense of memory but in a special sense. It is the experience of the 
large majority of aspirants on the path that the lessons of experi- 
ence are forgotten again and again and the same experiences have 
therefore to be repeated time after time thus involving tremendous 
waste of time and effort. The Yogi has to acquire the capacity 
to note the lessons of experience and to retain them in his consci- 
ousness for future guidance. Take, for example, a man who is 
suffering from indigestion. He knows that a particular kind of 
food which he likes does not agree with him, but when the parti- 
cular food comes before him he forgets all about the repeated 
sufferings which he has undergone, yields to the temptation, takes 
the food and goes through the suffering again. This is a crude 
example but it illustrates a state of mind which is generally present 
and which must be changed before progress in Yoga is possible. 
We have been going through all kinds of miseries life after life, the 
misery of old age, the misery of being torn away from those we 
love dearly, the misery of unfulfilled desires, and yet we are 
involving ourselves in these miseries again and again by our desires. 
Why? Because the lessons of these miseries fail to make a perma- 
nent impression on pur mind. So the aspirant for Liberation must 
have the capacity to learn from all experiences quickly and finally, 
not needing to go through the same experiences over and over 
again owing to the failure to remember the lessons of these experi- 
ences. If we could but retain such lessons in our memory per- 
manently our evolution would be extraordinarily rapid. The 
capacity to retain such lessons in our consciousness gives a finality 
to every stage which we cross in our onward journey and prevents 
our sliding back again and again. 

Samadhi-prajM means the peculiar state of the mind or consci- 
ousness which is essential for the practice of Samadhi. In this/ 
4 



50 



SECTION I (20, 2t) 



state the mind is turned inwards habitually, bent on the pursuit of 
the Reality hidden within it, absorbed in the deeper problems of 
life and oblivious of the external world even though taking part 
in its activities. Samddhi-prajna cannot obviously mean the state 
of consciousness during Samadhi because it precedes the state of 
Samadhi and Samadhi is the objective of Toga. 

If Samadhi has been attained by. following the regular Yogic 
technique (Updya-pratyaya) then it is real Samadhi in which the 
Yogi is vividly aware of the realities of the superphysical planes and 
can bring down with him the knowledge of the higher planes when 
he returns to the physical body. He is in full control of his 
vehicles all the time and can pass from one plane to another with- 
out suffering any intervening loss of consciousness. On the other 
hand if the Samadhi is the result of mere birth (Bhava-pratyaya) 
then it is not the real Samadhi as pointed out previously. This 
spurious kind of Samadhi may, at best, give fitful glimpses of the 
higher planes which are not reliable and under the control of the 
will, and even these may disappear as erratically as they have 
appeared. 

Tivra-samveganam asannah. 

dlsm'^IHH of those whose wish is intensely strong arr^r: 
' sitting near ', near at hand. 

21. It {Samadhi) is nearest to those whose desire 
(for Samadhi) is intensely strong. 

This Sutra and the next define the chief factors upon which 
depends the rate of progress of the Yogi towards his goal. The 
first factor is the degree of earnestness. The more ardently he 
desires to reach the object of his search the swifter is his progress. 
Progress in any line of endeavour is to a great extent determined 
by earnestness. A great intensity of desire polarizes all the mental 
faculties and powers and thus helps very greatly the realization of 



SAMADHI PADA 



51 



one's aims. But progress in Yoga depends upon the earnestness of 
the aspirant in a far greater degree and for this reason. In the 
case of objectives which are connected with the external world 
progress involves changes in the outer world, conditions for which 
may or may not be as favourable as desired. But in the case of 
the objective of Yoga the changes involved are all within the con- 
sciousness of the Yogi himself, and the obstacles are more or less of 
a subjective nature and confined within his own vehicles. There 
is, therefore, less dependence upon external circumstances and the 
internal conditions referred to above are more amenable to his 
control. A man of ambition if he wants to rise to a position of 
power and influence has to deal with the minds and attitudes of 
millions of men but the Yogi has to deal only with one mind — his 
own. And it is far easier to deal with one's own mind than 
that of others provided one is in earnest. Nothing really stands 
between the Yogi and his objective except his own desires and 
weaknesses which can be eliminated easily and quickly provided 
one earnestly wants to do so. This is so because they are mostly 
of a subjective nature and merely require understanding and 
change of attitude. 

Ye suffer from yourselves. None else compels, 

None other holds you that ye live and die 

And whirl upon the wheel and hug and kiss 

Its spokes of agony, — The Light of Asia 



It has been said by a great sage that it is easier to know your Atmd 
than to pluck a flower, for in the latter case you have to put forth 
your hand while in the former you have only to look within. 

The student need hardly be reminded that in the essential 
practice of Yoga we are dealing with the recession of consciousness 
within itself and not with any material change. The process is 
more of the nature of ' letting go ' than of ' building up ' some- 
thing which naturally takes time. Isvara-pranidhdna, for example, 
which is an independent and self-sufficient means of bringing 
about Samddhi,ca.n be developed with extraordinary rapidity when 
a spiritually mature soul surrenders itself whole-heartedly tp 
Isvara. It is really a process of ' letting go ' our hold on the 
attractions and pursuits of the worldly life and in such a process 



52 



SECTION I (21, 22) 



progress can be extremely rapid. In fact the whole process can be 
accomplished instantaneously. Besides being rapid the process is 
really very easy provided we are in dead earnest. While ' holding ' 
requires force and effort ' letting go ' does not require any force or 
effort and can be brought about by merely a change of attitude. 

The real trouble with most aspirants is that the degree of 
earnestness is very feeble and there is not sufficient pressure of 
will to break down all the hindrances and difficulties which stand 
in their way. Weaknesses and desires which would simply fade 
away in an atmosphere of earnestness and realistic approach t6 
the problems of life continue to keep them in bondage, year after 
year, life after life, because a sufficiently earnest desire for reaching 
the objective is absent. That is why intensity of desire is a sine 
qua non of rapid progress on the path of Toga and there is no limit 
to the extent to which the time taken for reaching the goal can 
be reduced. In fact, Self-realization can be instantaneous if the 
intensity and earnestness of desire is correspondingly great but it 
is a big ' if. Usually, the intensity of desire increases gradually 
with one's progress and it is only when the aspirant is almost 
nearing his goal that it attains the required tempo. 

It is, howeyer, necessary to mention that this desire to find 
one's Self is not desire in the ordinary sense and we use the same 
words in this way for lack of better terms to express our ideas. It 
has more the quality of indomitable will, that intense concentra- 
tion of purpose before which all obstacles and difficulties gradually 
melt away. It is because this Mumuksutva is sometimes reflected in 
the emotional field of our consciousness and there produces an 
intense longing for the realization of our aim that there is some 
justification for calling it a desire. 



^. *T^TS*TTfsi 



^ftsfa fa#T: I 



Mrdu-madhyadhimatratvat tato 
visesah. 



'F 



*T^- (on account of being) mild; soft mz(- medium; mode- 
rate - 3< l feimdc<4ld (and) intense or powerful <TcT: from it; after that 
arfq" also; even faflf : gradation; differentiation; distinction. 



SAMADHI PADA 



53 



22. A further differentiation (arises) by reason 
of the mild, medium and intense (nature of means 
employed) . 



The other factor which determines the rate of the Togi's 
progress is the nature of the means he adopts in the pursuit of his 
aim. Asfdnga Toga of Patanjali points out only the broad principles 
of the general method which has to be followed in liberating 
human consciousness from the limitations of Avidya and gaining 
Self-realization. It is true that in this system a well-defined 
technique has been laid down for achieving this end but the dif- 
ferent parts of this technique are not rigid in their nature but 
sufficiently elastic to allow the aspirant to adapt them to his per- 
sonal needs, temperament and convenience. A system which is 
meant to subserve the spiritual needs of different types of individ- 
uals living in different ages and with different potentialities and 
capacities could never prove very useful and could not withstand 
the ravages of time if it demanded adherence to a rigid and uniform 
course of discipline. The value of Patanjali's system of Toga lies 
in its elasticity and the capacity to subserve the needs of different 
types of individuals who share the one common purpose of unravel- 
ling the Great Mystery which is hidden within them and are 
prepared to make the necessary effort and sacrifices to achieve it. 
It has thus all the advantages of following a definite technique and 
none of the disadvantages of being confined within a rigid system. 

Although Patanjali's system allows great latitude as regards 
the means which may be adopted in achieving a particular pur- 
pose, still, being a scientific system, it is based on following a 
well-defined technique in tackling the different problems oiSadhana. 
And where technique is involved the progress in achieving any 
particular purpose must depend upon the nature of the means 
employed. If we want to be transported to a spot at a distance, 
however keen we may be to reach it, our progress will depend 
upon whether we use a bullock-cart, an automobile or an aeroplane. 
There are processes which do not involve any well-defined techni- 
que in the usual sense of the term. In such cases the question of 
means does not enter the problem at all. For example, if a person 



54 



SECTION I (22, 23) 



is in a fit of temper and wants to become calm he can come back 
to his normal condition by an adjustment of his attitude which 
can be so rapid as to appear almost instantaneous. There are 
certain systems of Toga which do not involve an elaborate technique. 
Such a path which is based on self-surrender is indicated in the 
next Sutra. In treading such a path there is really no technique 
and the progress depends upon intensifying ad infinitum one primary 
fundamental attitude or psychological process either through its 
own inherent power or by the help of certain subsidiary aids 
like jfapa. 

Coming back to the question of the rate of progress in cases 
where some kind of technique is involved let us see how Patanjali 
has classified these ' means '. He has put them in three classes — ■ 
mild, moderate and intense — thus following the classical method of 
classification adopted in Hindu philosophical thought. Wherever 
it is necessary to classify a number of things belonging to the same 
category and not differing from one another by sharply defined 
differences, it is the usual practice to classify these things broadly 
under three sub-heads as given above. Thus in 11-34 also where 
Vitarkas have to be classified the same triple classification has been 
adopted. This may outwardly appear to be a rather odd system 
of classification but on closer thought it will be seen that though 
not strictly scientific it has much to recommend it. It is simple, 
elastic and takes into account the relative nature of the means 
employed. What may be considered as ' intense ' by a Togi at one 
stage of evolution may appear ' moderate ' to another who is more 
highly advanced and actuated by greater intensity of desire. 

^. $JH<Mr u iynia.i i 

Isvara-pranidhanad va. 

§H4< God srfcnJFTT^r by ' placing oneself ' in (God) ; by 
devotional dedication to ; by self-surrender or resignation to (God) 
^T or. 



23. Or by self-surrender tc God. 



samadhi pada 



55 



The attainment of Samddhi is possible by following another 
path in which the aspirant does not bring about the deliberate 
suppression of the Citta-Vrttis by the force of his will. On this 
path he simply surrenders himself to the will of Isvara and merges 
all his desires with the Divine Will. What is Isvara-Pranidhana 
and how it can lead to Samddhi is explained at length in dealing 
with 11-32, 11-45. We need not, therefore, go into this question 
here. But let us try to understand the next few Sutras which are 
meant to give some idea with regard to Isvara to whom the 
aspirant has to surrender himself in this method of attaining 
Samddhi. 

These Sutras bearing upon Isvara have given rise to a contro- 
versy among scholars because Samkhya is supposed to be an atheistic 
doctrine and Toga is supposed to be based on Samkhya. The 
relation between Samkhya and Toga has not really been definitely 
settled though the philosophy of Toga is bound up so closely with 
that of Samkhya that the Toga system is sometimes referred to as 
Sesvara Samkhya. The practical student of Toga need not worry 
himself over these academic questions of philosophy. Toga is a 
practical science and every practical science has generally a 
theoretical basis which may or may not in reality correspond exactly 
with the facts which form the real basis of the science. , Since the 
system of Toga outlined by Patanjali is essentially a scientific 
system it was inevitable that he should adopt that particular 
system of philosophy for its theoretical basis which is most scientific 
in its outlook and comprehensive in its treatment. The choice of 
Samkhya for this purpose was therefore quite natural. But this does 
not mean necessarily that Toga is based on Samkhya or follows that 
system in toto. The very fact that it differs from Samkhya on the 
most fundamental question of Isvara and has suggested an indepen- 
dent method of attaining Samddhi through Isvara-Pranidhana shows 
that this apparent similarity of the two systems should not be taken 
too seriously. The fact that Samkhya while dealing with theoretical 
questions at great length is almost silent with regard to the 
practical methods of obtaining release from the bondage oS.Avid.ya 
is also of great significance. It shows that the system was meant 
to be nothing more than a purely theoretical philosophy offering 
a scientific and most plausible theory of life and the Universe in 



56 



SECTION J (23, 24) 



terms of the intellect. The real truths of existence were to be 
discovered directly by each person for himself by following a 
practical system such as the one outlined in the Toga-Sutras. 

Klesa -karma-vipakaSayair aparamrstah 
purusa-visesa Isvarah. 

^#9T (by) afflictions; misery; cause of misery ^nr actions; 
activities Pm^ maturation or fruition 3)191 *): (and) seed-germs or 
impressions of desires wherein desires sleep 3W<mt>d: untouched 
JW- Spirit; an individual unit or centre of Divine Consciousness 
f=t$l*l: special; particular |«cK: Ruler or Presiding Deity of a 
Brahmanda or Solar system. 

24. Is'vara is a particular Purusa who is untouched 
by the afflictions of life, actions and the results and 
impressions produced by these actions. 

In this Sutra Patanjali has given us two ideas with regard to 
Is'vara. The first is that He is a Purusa, an individual unit of 
Divine Consciousness like the other Purusas. The second is that 
He is not bound by Klesa, Karma, etc. like the other Purusas who 
are still involved in the cycle of evolution. As is pointed out later 
(IV-30) the Purusa becomes free from Klesa and Karma on attaining 
Kaivalya and the vehicle through which Karma works (Karmd- 
s'aya) is destroyed in his case. In what respects then does Is'vara 
differ from the other Mukta Purusas who have attained Kaivalya 
and become Liberated ? The explanation sometimes given that He 
is a special kind of Purusa who has not gone through the evolu- 
tionary process and who was ever free and untouched by the 
afflictions at any time is not very convincing and against the facts 
as they are known to Occult Science. 

The explanation of the discrepancy pointed out above lies in 
the fact that after the attainment of Kaivalya the evolutionary or 



SAMADHI PADA 



57 



unfolding process does not come to an end but new vistas of 
achievement and work open out before the Liberated Purusa. We 
can hardly comprehend the nature of this process or the work 
which it involves but that further stages do exist beyond Kaivalya 
is taken for granted in Occult Science. The further unfoldment 
of consciousness which takes place in the evolutionary progress 
beyond Kaivalya passes through many stages and culminates 
ultimately in that tremendously high and glorious stage in which 
the Purusa becomes the presiding Deity of a Solar system. During 
the previous stages He has occupied progressively higher and higher 
offices in the Hierarchies which govern and guide the various 
activities in the Solar system. The offices of the Adhikari Purusas 
of different grades like Buddhas, Manus etc. form, as it were, a 
ladder the lower end of which rests on the rock of Kaivalya and 
its other end is lost in the unimaginable glory and splendour of 
Divine Consciousness. The office of Is'vara is one of the highest 
if not the highest rung of this ladder. He is the Supreme Ruler 
of a Solar system or Brahmanda. It is in His Consciousness that 
the Solar system lives, moves and has its being. The different 
planes of the Solar system are His bodies and the powers working 
the machinery of the Solar system are His powers. In short, He 
is the Reality whom we generally refer to as God. 

How many further stages of unfoldment of consciousness exist 
between this stage and the undifferentiated Ultimate Reality 
which is referred to as Parabrahman in Vedanta we do not know. 
That such stages exist stands to reason and follows from the facts 
that the suns do not occupy fixed positions but probably revolve 
round other stars, that Solar systems are parts of bigger units called 
galaxies and these in their turn are parts of still bigger units 
called universes. Whatever the relation which subsists between 
Solar systems, galaxies, Universes and the Cosmos as a whole and 
their respective Presiding Deities (and astronomy is bringing more 
and more light to bear on this fascinating question) the concep- 
tion of the Cosmos being studded with innumerable Solar systems, 
and each Solar system being presided over by an Is'vara is in itself 
a tremendously grand idea whose truth is based not on mere 
poetic fancy but definite knowledge of Adepts of Occultism. And 
to think that the Presiding Deity of each of these Solar systemi is 



58 



SECTION I (24) 



SAMADHI PADA 



59 



a Purusa Visesa who has passed through the evolutionary cycle like 
everyone of us and attained to that inconceivably high level 
imparts a new significance to the idea of human evolution and 
places it on an entirely new basis. This is a fascinating line of 
thought which could be pursued in different directions but it is 
not possible to do so at this point. There is, however, one point 
which had better be cleared up before we proceed to consider the 
next Sutra. 

What is the relation existing between the /{vara of a Solar 
system and the innumerable Purusas who are either undergoing 
pre- Kaivalya evolution or are still associated with the Solar system 
after attaining Liberation ? According to the Samkhya, each Purusa 
is a separate and independent unit of consciousness and remains 
so eternally. So the Purusas who are part of the evolutionary 
scheme in a Solar system must be quite separate and independent 
of the Purusa Visesa who is its presiding Lord according to this 
philosophy. But according to Occult Science the different Purusas 
though separate and independent units of consciousness are yet in 
some mysterious manner one and share a- common Life and Con- 
sciousness. The consciousness of the Isvara provides a field in 
which the consciousness of the other Purusas in the Solar system 
can function and unfold. They are nourished by His life and evolve, 
from stage to stage until they themselves become fit to become 
Isvaras of other newly created Solar systems. So while they are in 
His Solar system they exist in Him and are one with Him in the 
most intimate manner and yet they maintain throughout their 
independent centre and individual uniqueness. This co-existence 
of Oneness and Separateness upto the last is one of those 
paradoxes of the inner life which the mere intellect can never 
understand and which only realization of our true nature can 
resolve. 

But we need not go further into this question. Enough has 
been said to show that the idea of Isvara has not been artifi- 
cially grafted on the basic Samkhyan philosophy for the sake of 
convenience but is an integral part of that larger philosophy of 
the East which is based on the direct experience of an unbroken 
line of adepts and mystics and of which Samkhya shows merely 
one facet. It should be remembered that the Toga-Sutras is a 



*r"' 



book of technical nature giving the technique of Toga and the 
essential doctrines of this basic philosophy must be understood if 
that technique is to be mastered properly. It does not mean 
that what is not given in the Toga-Sutras does not conform with the 
Togic philosophy upon which the book is based. The ideas in 
Toga-Sutras should be studied against the background of the total 
Eastern philosophy and there is no justification for isolating them 
and studying them as if they were based on Samkhya or a separate 
and independent philosophy. 

Tatra niratisayam Sarvajna-bijam. 

tt in Him ftrf^nf the highest; unsurpassed *Nfcf- (of) the 
Omniscient eftif the seed; the principle. 

25. In Him is the highest limit of Omniscience. 

This Sutra gives us another idea with regard to Isvara the 
Presiding Deity of a Solar system. The meaning of the Sutra is. 
easy to understand but its real significance is generally missed. In 
order to understand this significance it is necessary to bear in mind 
that each Solar system is considered to be a separate and, to a 
great extent, independent manifestation of the One Reality corres- 
ponding with its isolation and separation by tremendous distances 
from other Solar systems in space. We may imagine the innu- 
merable Solar systems scattered throughout the Cosmos as so 
many centres in the Consciousness of the One Reality in mani- 
festation which is called Saguna Brahman in Hindu philosophy. 
Round each such centre manifests the life of the Logos or Isvara 
of that Solar system much in the same way as the life of a Puruja 
manifests round the centre of his consciousness through a set of 
vehicles. Each Solar system may thus be considered as a sort of 
reincarnation of its Ijvara bringing into each new manifestation on 
a macrocosmic scale the Samskaras of the previous Solar systems 
which have preceded it. 



60 



SECTION I (25) 



Since each Solar system is the manifestation of the conscious-, 
ness of its Isvara and each Isvara represents a definite stage in the 
infinite unfoldment of consciousness in the world of the Relative, it 
follows that His knowledge though almost unlimited in relation to 
the other Purusas in the Solar system must be considered to be 
limited in relation to the Ultimate Reality of which He is a partial 
manifestation. We should not forget that manifestation always 
implies limitation and even an Isvara is in the realm of Maya 
however thin may be the veil of Illusion which separate His 
consciousness from that of the Nirguna Brahman who alone can be* 
considered unlimited in the real sense of the term. So the 
Omniscience of an Isvara is a relative thing and has a limit and it 
is this limit which is referred to in this Sutra. 

Now all the Purusas in a particular Solar system or Brahmanda 
are undergoing a process of evolution and the ' seed ' of Omni- 
science in each Purusa is unfolding gradually. This unfoldment takes 
place slowly in the course of ordinary evolution. When Toga is 
practised and consciousness begins to function on the subtler 
superphysical planes the unfoldment is accelerated to a remarkable 
degree and the boundaries of knowledge are suddenly enlarged at 
each successive stage in Samddhi. When Kaivalya is attained after 
Dharma-Megha-Samddhi a tremendous expansion of consciousness 
takes place as pointed out in IV-31. Even after the attainment of 
Kaivalya, as has been pointed out already, the unfoldment of 
consciousness does not come to an end and such unfoldment must 
be accompanied by a corresponding expansion of knowledge. Is 
there any limit to this expansion of knowledge in the case of the 
Purusas who are undergoing evolution in a Solar system and whose 
consciousness is a part of the consciousness of the Uvara of the 
system? There must be and that limit will naturally be the 
relative Omniscience of the Isvara, or the knowledge which is 
contained in His consciousness. No Purusa can cross that limit as 
long as he is a part of the Solar system and his consciousness is 
based, as it were, on the consciousness of the Isvara. His knowledge 
may go on expanding and may appear infinite but it cannot 
expand beyond the infinite knowledge of the Isvara of the system 
just as a fountain cannot rise higher than the reservoir which 
supplies water to it. 



SAMADHI PADA 



61 



R%. ST ^fawfa TO: *MHM<*-«*9<4ld I 

Sa purvesam api guruh kalenana- 
vacchedat. 

H: He ^PTnr of the Ancients; of those who came before or 
first arfq- even *TC: teacher ^n%»T by time 3(Mc|-°d4ld on account of 
not being limited or conditioned. 

26. Being unconditioned by time He is Teacher 
even of the Ancients. 

We have seen in the previous Sutra that the knowledge which 
the Isvara of a Brahmanda carries in His consciousness sets a limit 
which no one can cross. Not only in knowledge but also in other 
respects such as power He must be the highest expression in the 
Solar system and all lesser Entities such as Manus, Buddhas and 
Devatas, however high their status, must derive their power from 
Him. That is why He is called livara, the Supreme Lord or Ruler. 
A Solar system, though insignificant as compared with the Cosmos, 
is still a gigantic phenomenon in time and space. Many planets 
are born in it, live their life and then disappear, providing during 
a certain period of their existence a field for the evolution of the 
innumerable Jivatmas who are part of the Solar System. During 
all this stupendous period extending over billions of years who 
guides the different humanities and races which appear and then 
disappear on the habitable planets ? Who inspires and gives knowl- 
edge to those who become the Teachers and Leaders of mankind 
from time to time ? Only Isvara can fill this role because He alone 
survives and continues through all these stupendous changes. 

The word Guruh means both the Teacher as well as the 
Master, but here, since we are dealing with a treatise on Toga, the 
emphasis is obviously on the former meaning. This means that 
He is the Supreme Teacher who not only gives knowledge to the 
highest teachers but is also the real Teacher, behind all the 
teachers who are trying to spread the light of knowledge and 
Divine Wisdom in the world. Scientists and other seekers after 
knowledge may vainly think that they are wresting the secrets of 



62 



SECTION I (26, 27) 



Nature and enlarging the boundar ;s of human knowledge by their 
own ingenuity and indomitable wi> but this attitude is utterly wrong, 
born of egoism and illusion which generally chaiacterize purely 
intellectual pursuits. It is the pressure of Divine knowledge and 
will behind the evolutionary progress of humanity which is natur- 
ally enlarging the boundaries of human knowledge, and individuals 
merely become the instruments of the Supreme Guru in Whom all 
knowledge resides. Anyone who has watched with an open mind 
and a reverent heart the phenomenal progress of Science in 
modern times and the remarkable manner in which discoveries 
have been made, one after another, can see the guiding and 
unseen hand and intelligence behind these discoveries. It is a great 
pity that this spirit of reverence is lacking in modern Science and 
puny man, the creature of a day, has taken all the credit for the 
rapid and phenomenal expansion of knowledge which has taken 
place during recent times. It is this lack of reverence, the product 
of blatant materialism which is at the bottom of the wrong 
direction which Science is gradually taking, making knowledge 
more and more the instrument of destruction and unhappiness 
rather than that of ordered progress and true happiness. If this 
tendency is allowed to grow unchecked the mighty edifice of 
Science is bound to crash one day in a cataclysm which will destroy 
the fruits of knowledge garnered through centuries. Where there 
is nO humility and reverence in the pursuit of knowledge it bodes 
ill for those who are engaged in its pursuit. 

Howsoever it may be in the field of Science, in the field of 
Divine Wisdom livara is not only considered to be the fount of all 
knowledge and wisdom but the real and the only Teacher existing 
in the world. All great Spiritual Teachers have been considered 
to be the embodiments of the Great Guru and have taught in His 
name and through His power. The ' Light on the Path ' is the 
light of His knowledge, the ' Voice of the Silence ' is His voice. 
This is a truth which all aspirants treading the path of Tog a must 
burn into their hearts. 



Tasya vacakah pranavah. 



SAMADHI PADA 



63 



^TW His (of Isvara) ejn+: designator; indicator TTT^: ' Om' 
pronounced A-U-M as a humming sound. 

27. His designator is * Om '. 

Having given in the previous three Sutras some necessary infor- 
mation about Iivara the author points out in the next three 
Sutras a definite method of establishing direct contact with Him. 
Before dealing with these three Sutras it is necessary to give very 
briefly some idea with regard to the theory of Mantra-Toga, for 
without at least a general idea of this branch of Toga it is not 
possible to understand adequately the significance of these Sutras. 

Mantra-Toga is that branch of Toga which seeks to bring about 
changes in matter arid consciousness by the agency of Sound ' the 
word Sound being used not in its modern scientific sense but in a 
special sense as we shall see just now. According to the doctrine 
upon which Mantra-Toga is based the primary manifestation of the 
Ultimate Reality takes place through the agency of a peculiar and 
subtle vibration which is called Sab da and which means Sound or 
Word. The world is not only created but maintained by this 
Sabda which differentiates into innumerable forms of vibration 
which underlie the phenomenal world. 

It is necessary first to understand how all the phenomena of 
Nature can be ultimately based on vibration or peculiar expressions 
of Energy. First, let us take the material side of these phenomena. 
Physical matter has been found by Science to consist of atoms and 
molecules which in their turn are the result of different combina- 
tions of still smaller particles like electrons etc. Science has not 
been able as yet to get a clear picture with regard to the ultimate 
constitution of physical matter but it has been shown definitely and 
conclusively that matter and energy are inter-convertible. The 
Theory of Relativity has shown that mass and energy are not two 
different entities but are one and the same, the relation between 
the two being given by the well-known equation of Einstein, 

E = C 2 (m'-m) 

Not only is matter an expression of Energy but the perception 
of material phenomena depends upon vibrations of various kinds. 



64 



SECTION I (27) 



Vibrations of different kinds striking the organs of sensation pro- 
duce the five kinds of sensations and the familiar world of light, 
sound etc. is thus based on vibration. Modern psychology has not 
been able to investigate or understand the nature of mental 
phenomena but the study of these phenomena by Occult methods 
has shown definitely that their perception is dependent on vibra- 
tions in mediums subtler than the physical. There are some 
phenomena known to modern psychologists such as thought-trans- 
ference which lend support to this view. 

It will be seen, therefore, that there is nothing inherently 
absurd in the doctrine that the foundation of the whole manifested 
world existing on many planes and consisting of innumerable pheno- 
mena is a tremendously complex and vast aggregate of vibrations 
of various kinds and degrees. These vibrations or expressions of 
energy not only constitute the material of the manifested world 
(using the word material in its widest sense) but by their actions 
and interactions produce all the phenomena of the different planes. 
This conclusion, though startling, is nothing as compared with the 
still more myserious doctrine of Occult Science according to which 
all these infinitely complex vibrations of innumerable variety are 
the expressions of a Single Vibration and this Single Vibration is 
produced by the Will of the Mighty Being who is the Presiding 
Deity of the particular manifested world whether this world be a 
Solar system, Universe or the Cosmos. This tremendous, primary, 
and integrated vibration from which are derived all the vibrations 
in manifestation is called Sabda-Brahman, i.e. the Ultimate Reality 
in its aspect of « Sound ', the word * Sound ' being used in the most 
comprehensive and rather mysterious sense as pointed out before. 
This doctrine put in simple and general terms means that the 
Ultimate Reality carrying within Itself the Samskaras of previous 
manifestations differentiates on manifestation into two primary 
and complementary expressions— one a composite Integrated 
Vibration called Sabda-Brahman and the other an underlying inte- 
grated Consciousness called Brahma-Caitanya (i.e. the Reality in its 
aspect of Consciousness). These two expressions are comple- 
mentary and mutually dependent since they are the dual 
expressions of the One Reality and appear or disappear 
simultaneously. 



SAMADHI PADA 



65 



From this primary relationship of vibration and consciousness 
existing on the highest level of manifestation flows the relation of 
these two on all the planes of manifestation down to the physical. 
So that we find that wherever there is manifestation of conscious- 
ness there is vibration associated with it whether we are able to 
trace it or not. Not only are vibration and consciousness so inti- 
mately and indissolubly connected but there is a specific relation- 
ship existing between each kind of vibration and the particular 
aspect of consciousness which it can give expression to, so that 
each kind of vibration is matched, as it were, by a corresponding 
state of consciousness. This relation may be understood to a 
certain extent by considering its expression at the lowest level, 
namely, sensuous perception. Each particular vibration of light 
with a definite wavelength produces its corresponding colour per- 
ception in consciousness. Each particular vibration of sound 
produces perception of the corresponding note in consciousness. 
Although Science has not yet been able to investigate the hidden 
mechanism of other kinds of sensations it will probably be found 
when such investigations have been made successfuly that each 
sensation of taste, smell and touch is matched by a corresponding 
vibration of some kind. What is true on the lowest level is true 
on all levels of manifestation and therefore there is nothing 
inherently unreasonable in supposing that consciousness can be 
influenced or reached by means of vibration or to put it in other 
words, particular states of consciousness can be brought about by 
initiating particular kinds of vibrations. Not only can conscious- 
ness be affected by vibration, but consciousness by initiating par- 
ticular vibrations can also influence matter and bring about changes 
in matter. 

The broad and general principles pointed out above form the 
basis of Mantra-Sastra, the science of using Mantras for bringing 
about certain tangible results, and also of Mantra-Toga, the science 
of unification or unfoldment of consciousness by the help of Mantras. 
The essential idea underlying both is that by producing a parti- 
cular kind of vibration through a vehicle it is possible to draw 
down a particular kind of force through the vehicle or to produce 
a particular state of consciousness in the vehicle. Such vibrations 
can be produced by means of Mantras each of which represents a 
5 



66 



SECTION I (2?) 



particular combination of sounds for bringing about certain 
specific results. 

Since a Mantra is a composite thing, -a particular combination 
of sounds arranged in a particular way, it is interesting to enquire 
what are the basic sounds which are utilized in these combina- 
tions. Without going into the details of this question it may be 
simply stated that the letters of the Samskrta alphabet are the 
elements from which all Mantras of Samskrta origin are derived. 
Each letter is supposed to be the vehicle of a basic eternal power 
(that is why it is called Aksara) and when introduced into a Mantra 
contributes its specific influence to the total effect which is the 
objective of the Mantra, much in the same way as the different 
chemical elements contribute their specific properties to the com- 
pounds which are derived from them. There are 52 letters of the 
Samskrta alphabet and therefore there are 52 basic elemental 
powers which are available for producing all kinds of effects 
through the agency of Mantras in their different permutations and 
combinations. It does not mean, of course, that the Samskrta 
alphabet has some favoured place in the scheme of Nature and 
the sounds produced by its letters alone can be utilized in con- 
structing Mantras. All that is meant is that the effects of sounds 
produced by letters in the Samskrta alphabet have been investigated 
and evaluated and can thus be used in the construction of Mantras. 
With this brief introduction let us now consider the important 
Sutra under discussion. 

In 1-26 it was pointed out that Isvara is the true Teacher of 
all and the source of the Inner Light by the help of which the 
Yogi treads the path of Liberation. How is that Inner Light to 
be revealed, to be uncovered so that he may have an unerring 
and ever-present guide within himself? This Light appears when 
the mind becomes sufficiently purified by the practice of Toga as 
is indicated in 11-28. But there are certain initial difficulties 
which must be overcome before the practice of Toga can begin in 
right earnest. These difficulties are related to the general condi- 
tion of the mind which in the case of the large majority of 
aspirants is not at all favourable for the practice of Toga. It is sub- 
ject to constant and sometimes violent distractions which make it 
impossible for the aspirant to adopt a life of discipline and to dive 



SAMADHI PADA 



67 



within the recesses of his consciousness. How are these distrac- 
tions to be overcome and the mind steadied sufficiently so that it 
may become possible for the aspirant to be firmly established 
on the path of Toga ? The next and the subsequent Sutras deal with 
this important problem. 

The first and ruost effective means which Patanjali prescribed 
for overcoming this distracted condition of the mind is the Japa of 
Pranava and meditation on its meaning. He calls Pranava as the 
Vacaka of Isvara. What is a Vdcaka? The literal meaning of Vacaka 
is name or designator but in Mantra-Toga it has a specialized 
meaning and is used for a name which is essentially of the nature 
of a Mantra and has the power when used in a prescribed manner 
of revealing the consciousness and releasing the power of a Devata 
or Divine Being. Being a sound combination which is used to 
designate a particular Entity it is like a name. But an ordinary 
name is chosen arbitrarily to indicate somebody and it has no 
natural or mystic relationship with the person. A Vacaka, on the 
other hand, is a name which has a mystic relationship with the 
Vacya (the Entity designated) and has inherent in it the power of 
revealing the consciousness and releasing the power of the indi- 
vidual for whom it stands. Such a Vacaka is Om. It is considered 
to be the most mystical, sacred and powerful Mantra by the Hindus 
because it is the Vacaka of Iivara, the Greatest Power and the 
Supreme Consciousness as far as our Solar system is concerned. 

It may seem preposterous to the ordinary man not familiar 
with the inner side of life that a mere syllable of three letters can 
carry hidden within it the potential power which is attributed to 
it by all Yogis, and references to which are found scattered 
throughout the sacred scriptures of the Hindus. But facts are facts 
and they are not at all affected by the ignorance and prejudices 
of people who disbelieve in them. Who could have believed 
fifty years ago that a mere neutron moving among a number of 
uranium atoms could produce an explosion powerful enough to 
blow up a whole city? Anyone who understands the theory of 
Mantra- Yoga and the relation of vibration with consciousness 
should be able to see that there is nothing inherently impossible in 
the idea of a mystic syllable possessing such a power. Besides, we 
should remember that the facts of the inner life with which Yoga 



68 



s ^ 



<iTION I (27,28) 
^j upon ej( 
deals are bas e ^.o*- be n ^rience no less than the facts of Science, 
though it ra&Y ^ible or desirable to demonstrate them. 



^ 






repetition and meditation on its 



* tad-artha-bhavanam. 

-f5 constant 
cRT-»PT: jV mind- ^P etition ^RT- 3 ^ (of ) its meaning %\\4<\H 

dwelling up o11 ' Realizing; meditation. 

28. It. c ° ns N 

meaning. 

t j!e powet 
How can ^ e rerne ^f a Mantra like the Pranava be developed ? 
For, it has to - e powe>T* bered that this power is potential, not 
active. It i s viding *>f a seed which needs to be developed 
gradually by P tor whi Attain essential conditions, not the power 
of an electric **^ xyequeriH * s available on merely pressing a button. 
This is a fa c rfie rely r ^ lost sight of by many people. They 
think that £>y . eC J result. Seating a Mantra a few times they can 
obtain the d eS t jxe resi > They cannot. A Mantra can no more 
give in this ^ a ' ^atisfv -. * for which it is devised than a seed of a 



mango tree ca ^ the ** ban who is hungry. The seed must be 
sown, watered t j s fy tu *lder plant tended for years before it can 
bear fruit and •£&$ i n hungry. In the same way the potential 



power which * , e righ* Mantra must be developed slowly by the 
application ° ^ adv» Methods before it can become available 
for the spi r ^ years ^cement of the Sadhaka. The process 
generally tak e ^ c tice ^ the most strenuous and one-pointed 
discipline and r ^ g not *q even then the Sadhaka may not be quite 
successful if h e Afan^. Wded the right conditions. The higher 

the object of t^g the J* the more difficult and prolonged the 
process of unf° jjacipal t^wer which is latent in it. 

The two P -whicK^eans of developing the power which is 
latent in Praf a - 1JX tne ' ^re equally applicable to other similar 
Mantras are g iV . a well-u ^tra we are considering. The first means 
is Japa. This * ate d a %wn technique of Manpra-Toga in which 



the Mantra is 



reP £ 



*& 



^in and again (first audibly, then silently 



samAdhi pada 



69 



and lastly mentally) in a prescribed manner until the desired 
results begin to appear. The repetition of the Mantra is necessary 
and sometimes the Sadhakas are required to repeat it such an 
enormous number of times that it becomes a test of their patience 
and endurance. But though generally this number is great the 
number by itself is not the most important factor. The other 
conditions— mental and emotional' — are equally important. Japa 
begins in a mechanical repetition but it should pass by stages into 
a form of meditation and unfpldment of the deeper layers of con- 
sciousness. 

The efficacy of Japa is based upon the fact that every Jivatma 
is a microcosm thus having within himself the potentialities of 
developing all states of consciousness and all powers which are 
present in the active form in the macrocosm. All the forces which 
can help this Divine spark within each human heart to become a 
roaring fire are to be applied. And the unfoldment of conscious- 
ness takes place as a result of the combined action of all these 
forces rather than the mere repetition of the Mantra. Still, the 
Mantra must be there to integrate and polarize these forces as the 
tiny seed must be there to utilize the soil, water, air and sunshine 
in the development of the tree. It is not possible to deal here 
with the modus operandi of Japa and the manner in which it arouses 
the potentialities of the microcosmic Jivatma. It may be merely 
pointed out that its potency depends upon its capacity to arouse 
subtle vibrations within the vehicles which it affects. A Mantra is 
a sound combination and thus represents a physical vibration 
which is perceptible to the physical ear. But this physical vibra- 
tion is its outermost expression and hidden behind the physical 
vibration and connected with it are subtler vibrations much in the 
same way as the dense physical body of man is his outermost 
expression and is connected with his subtler vehicles. These dif- 
ferent aspects of Vak or ' speech ' are called Vaikhari, Madhyama, 
Pasyanti and Para. Vaikhari is the audible sound which can lead 
through the intermediate stages to the subtlest form of Para Vak. 
It is really through the agency of these subtler forms of ' sound ' 
that the unfoldment of consciousness takes place and the hidden 
potentialities become active powers. This release of powers takes 
a definite course according to the specific nature of the Mantra 



70 



SECTION I (28,29) 



just as a seed grows into a tree, but into a particular kind of tree 
according to the nature of the seed. 

The other means of utilizing the power which is latent in 
Pranava is Bhavand. This word literally means ' dwelling upon in 
mind '. Let us try to understand its significance in the present 
context. The object of the dual practice prescribed in this Sutra 
is to contact the Divine Consciousness of Is'vara. The Japa has the 
effect of attuning the vehicles. But something more is necessary 
in order to bring down the Divine influence and establish contact 
with the Divine Consciousness. If an electric current is to flow 
into a mechanism we need not only conductance or capacity to 
transmit the current but also voltage, pressure to make the current 
flow. In the same way in order to make it possible for the in- 
dividual consciousness to draw nearer to the Divine Consciousness 
we need not only atiunement of the vehicles but a drawing force, 
an attraction which corresponds to voltage in the flow of the 
electric current. This force which draws together the two — the 
Jivdtmd and the Paramdtmd — may take different forms. In Bhakti- 
Toga, for example, it takes the form of intense devotion or love. 
In Mantra-Toga it takes the form of Bhavand or intense meditation 
on the significance of the Mantra and the object which is sought 
to be gained. This Bhavand is not merely an intellectual process 
like the one we employ in finding the solution of a mathematical 
problem. It is a joint action of all our faculties in the pursuit of 
a common goal. So that not only the spirit of intellectual enquiry 
is there but also the deep yearning of the lover who wants to find 
the Beloved and the will of the Hatha-Togi who wants to break 
through all the barriers which separate him from the object of his 
search. This kind of Bhavand polarizes all our powers and facul- 
ties and produces the necessary concentration of purpose. Thus 
gradually the distractions which take the mind of the aspirant 
away from the object of his search are removed and he is able to 
turn his attention inwards. 

^5.. CRT: M^^cHlRT^IHli^TKNmM^ | 

Tatah pratyak-cetanadhigamo 
'pyantaraya-bhavas ca. 



SAMADHI PADA 



71 



rRT: from it (this practice) 5tr*R7 (of) in-turned; in the opposite 
direction %^PTT consciousness 3lfy*m: attainment arpr also ap^niir 
(of) hindrances; obstacles snTTW: absence; disappearance ^ and. 

29. From it (result) the disappearance of obstacles 
and turning inward of consciousness. 

In this Sutra Patanjali has given the two results which ensue 
from the practice prescribed in the previous Sutra. First, the 
awakening of a new kind of consciousness which is called Pratydk 
Cetana, and second, the gradual disappearance of the ' obstacles '. 

Let us first try to understand what is meant by Pratyak Cetana. 
There are two kinds of consciousness of diametrically opposite 
nature — Pratyak and Paranga or inward-turned and outward-turned. 
If we study the mind of the ordinary individual we shall find that 
it is entirely outward-turned. It is immersed in the outer world 
and is occupied all the time with the procession of images which 
pass continuously in the field of consciousness. This outward- 
turned consciousness is caused by Viksepa the projection outward 
by the lower mind of what is present within it at the centre. 
As we shall deal with the question of Viksepa fully in discussing 
the next Sutra let us leave it here and try to understand what 
Pratyak Cetana is. As has been pointed out above Pratyak Cetana is 
the inward-turned consciousness or consciousness directed towards 
its centre. It is thus the exact opposite of the outward-turned or 
Paranga Cetana as illustrated in the following figures. 





PRATYAK CETANA PARANGA CETANA 

Fig. 2 



72 



SECTION I (29) 



The whole aim and process of Toga consists in withdrawing 
the consciousness from without to within, for the ultimate mystery 
of life is hidden in the very heart or centre of our being and can 
be found only there and nowhere else. In the case of the Togi 
the tendency of the lower mind to run outwards and to keep itself 
busy with the objects of the outer world must therefore be 
replaced gradually by a tendency to return automatically to its 
' centred ' condition without effort. It is only under these condi- 
tions that it can be 'joined ', as it were, with the higher principles. 
But it may be pointed out that this mere tendency to be pointed 
towards the centre is not Pratyak Cetana although it is a necessary 
stage in its attainment. It is the actual contact with the higher 
principles resulting in the irradiation of the personality by the 
influence of these higher principles (Atma-Buddhi-Manas) which is 
^he essence of Pratyak Cetana. The contact is no doubt indirect but 
it is sufficiently effective and real to enable the personality to 
derive from it many advantages. The strength of the Atma, the 
illumination of Buddhi and the knowledge of the higher mind 
gradually filter down into the personality in an ever-increasing 
measure and provide the necessary guidance and momentum for 
treading the path of Toga. The contact becomes direct only in 
Samadhi when consciousness leaves one vehicle after another and 
becomes centred at deeper and deeper levels. 

The other result of Japa and meditation on Pranava is the 
gradual disappearance of the obstacles which lie in the path of 
the Togi. These obstacles are of various kinds — impurities and 
disharmonies in the vehicles, weaknesses of character, lack of 
development etc. But Pranava as we have seen touches the very 
heart of our being, arouses in the microcosm vibrations which can 
bring out from it all the latent powers and faculties which lie 
sleeping there. So all obstacles whatever their nature, yield to its 
dynamic stimulation. The deficiencies are made up by the growth 
of the corresponding faculties or the flow of additional power. The 
impurities are washed away. The disharmonies in the vehicles 
are smoothed out and the vehicles become attuned to one another 
and to the Supreme Consciousness of Isvara. And so a complete 
regeneration of the individuality takes place, a regeneration which 
makes it fit to tread the path of Astanga Toga or Isvaro-Pranidhana. 



samadht pAda 



73 



It is obvious that an instrument so effective and powerful in 
its action cannot be used in a haphazard and careless manner 
without involving the Sadhaka in all kinds of difficulties and 
dangers. A careful consideration of the necessary conditions and 
their strict regulation is therefore absolutely necessary. This is 
not the place to deal with these conditions in detail. It is enough 
to point out that purity, self-control and a very cautious and 
gradual use of the power are some of the essential conditions. So 
the practice can be taken up usefully and safely only after Tama 
and Niyama have been mastered to a considerable extent. 

The seven Sutras from 1-23 to 1-29 form; in a way, a separate 
set giving the technique of the path of mysticism on which the 
aspirant goes direct to his goal without studying and mastering 
the intermediate planes which separate him from the object of his 
search. On this path self-surrender is the only weapon and in 
using this weapon Japa and meditation on Pranava constitute the 
sole technique. The Japa and meditation turn the consciousness 
of the aspirant right about in the direction of his goal, remove all 
the obstacles and self-surrender does the rest. 

Vyadhi-styana-samsaya-pramadalasya- 
virati-bhranti-darsanalabdhabhumi- 
katvanavasthitatyani citta-viksepas 
te 'ntarayah. 



oijlflr- disease *^M- dullness; languor ; drooping state sfsPT- 
doubt 5PTTC- carelessness 3<M<^- laziness ^Pufd- hankering after 
objects "STlPtWyT'f- delusion; erroneous view 3i<?i«'6i i Hpi e t>^- non- 
achievement of a stage; inability to find a footing 3tiqlt*<a^uPi 
(and) unsteadiness; instability f^T (of) mind fasiHi: distractions 
(causes of distraction) ^ they (are) aRRPTT: obstacles; hindrances. 



74 



SECTION I (30) 



samadhi pada 



75 



30 Disease, languor, doubt, carelessness, laziness, 
worldly-mindedness, delusion, non-achievement of a 
stage, instability, these (nine) cause the distraction of 
the mind and they are the obstacles. 

It was pointed out in the last Sutra that the turning outward 
of consdol £ I. caused by Vik ? e P a. In this Sutra *££*£ 
a number of conditions which cause the mud to ^ d ^cted and 
which consequently make the successful practice <****™»™_ 
ble. This distracted condition of the mxnd in which it is con 
stantly flung about in all directions, away from the centre « 
cXd IvZL Since this condition of the mind is the opposite of 
called V*j e P a - nractice of Yoea we have to understand 

that needed for the practice oi iogu T« enable 

clearly the nature of IT*,** and the means to avoid it To ^able 
us to do this let us first cast a glance at the mind of the average 
In of the world. There are two general characteristics which 
we are likely to find in the large majority of people. The first is 
The Uck of purpose. They drift through life being -med along on 
Z current in a helpless manner. There is no to^etoe 
within them which can modify their circumstances and give a 
c^un direction to their life. Even when they djadctop^ 
any particular objective they are easily thrown off "the ^ track by 
any obstacles that may come in their path In *«£ 1 ^X 
not developed concentration of purpose which enables a man to 
pursue an aim relentlessly until he has achieved it. Of course 
5S are some exceptional people who ^ve developed a strong 
will and have the capacity to pursue a fixed ™j£™££ 
gained. Such people generally rise to the top in then «J^ 
spheres of work and become captains of industry, great inventors, 
scientists and political leaders. ., of 

Now though the Yogi has no ambitions and the pursuit ol 
any woddly aims does nof form part of his life, still, he does need 
"nJntration of purpose like any ambitious man working - the 
outer world. The pursuit of Yogic ideals requires in fact more 
eventration of purple than that of any worldly aim «£*££ 
in the first place, the difficulties are greater and in .the second 
place, the sphere of work is inside and the objective is to a great 



I 



extent unknown and intangible. The Yogi has generally to work 
against great odds, the results of his efforts take a long time to 
appear and even when they do appear do not bring with them 
the kind of satisfactions for which the lower nature of man 
generally craves. So, only an extraordinary concentration of 
purpose can enable him to keep to his course in the face of 
difficulties and obstacles. If this is not present he is likely to 
suffer from frustration and the disintegration of his mental 
forces to which such frustration generally leads. Under these 
circumstances distractions of all kinds such as those mentioned in 
the present Sutra are likely to arise and cause the mind to be 
thrown constantly off" the track. 

The second general characteristic of the ordinary mind is that 
it is constantly and completely turned outwards. It is used to 
taking interest only in the obj'ects of the outer world and this habit 
has become so strong that any effort to reverse the direction of 
consciousness and to make the mind withdraw from the periphery 
to the centre is accompanied by a mental struggle. Even in the 
case of people who are generally called introverts the tendency is 
merely to keep oneself occupied with one's mental images in 
disregard of what is happening in the outer world. This is rather 
an abnormal condition of the mind and is quite different from 
that condition in which the mind is directed to its centre and is 
thus attuned to the higher principles. 

This centrifugal tendency of the mind does not matter in the 
case of the ordinary man because his interest and field of work is 
in the external world and the question of drawing the mind within 
does not arise. But the Yogi has to draw the mind within and the 
centrifugal tendency must therefore be replaced by a centripetal 
tendency so strong that it requires definite force of will to keep the 
mind directed outwards. These two tendencies which make the 
mind inward-turned or outward-turned correspond to Pratyak and 
Paranga Getana and may be illustrated by the same diagrams which 
were used in representing the two forms of consciousness in dealing 
with the last Sutra. 

This condition of the mind in which it is turned outwards 
and is subject to distractions is also called Viksepa. It is the 
normal condition in the case of the ordinary man and is taken as 



76 



SECTION I (30) 



a matter of course by him because he grows up with it and it does 
not interfere with the kind of work he is required to do. The 
word Viksepa is used generally only in this ordinary sense and it is 
very probable that it has been used by Patanjali in this sense in 
the present context. But there is a mystery underlying this natural 
tendency of the mind to remain outward-turned which throws 
some light on the nature of Viksepa. It is worthwhile referring to 

it briefly here. 

If we are to understand this mystery let us first consider the 
formation of a virtual image by a mirror. We all know that if an 
object is placed in front of a plain mirror an exact image of it is seen 
in the mirror and the image appears to be on the other side of the 
mirror at the same distance as the object is in front of it. The for- 
mation of such an image can be illustrated by the following diagram. 



M 




.- •.„'"/:• 



N 



Fig. 3 



A is the object and A' is its image formed by the mirror MN. It 
will be seen that all the rays coming from the object and striking 
the mirror are reflected in such a manner that if the reflected rays 
are produced backwards they would meet at the point A where 
the image of the object is seen. It is because the reflected rays all 
seem to come from the point A that the virtual image of the object 
is seen at that point. It is easy to see that this virtual image is a 
pure illusion produced by the peculiar reflection of light rays. 
But the important point to note in this phenomenon is that an 
object can be seen at a place where there exists nothing at all 
corresponding to it. 



SAMADHI PADA 



77 



In a similar manner the familiar world of forms, colours, 
sounds etc. which we see outside us and in which we live our life 
is formed by a mysterious process of mental projection. The 
vibrations which are conveyed through the sense-organs to our 
brain produce through the instrumentality of the mind an image 
in our consciousness > but the mind projects this image outwards 
and it is this projection which produces the impression of a real 
world outside us. As a matter of fact, this impression of the 
familiar solid and tangible world outside us is a pure illusion. 
The world image we see is a virtual, image in the sense that the 
objects we see outside us are not there at all. Their appearance 
there is based on the external world of atoms and molecules and 
their vibrations which stimulate the sense-organs as well as on the 
inner world of Reality which is the ultimate basis of the mental 
image. The mind brings about the interaction of spirit and 
matter and in addition projects the result of this interaction out- 
side as a virtual image as shown in the following diagram : 




It is this projection outwards by the lower mind of what is really 
within which constitutes the fundamental nature of Viksepa and 
which lies at the basis of this outward-turned condition of the mind. 



78 



SECTION I (30) 



The fact that the world image which we see outside us is an 
illusion does not necessarily mean the denial of the physical world. 
The physical world is the stimulator of the world image but the 
image is the mind's own creation (in the light of Reality). This 
is not in contravention of modern scientific ideas. Take, for 
example, the question of colour. All that Science knows is that 
light vibrations of a certain frequency give the impression of a 
certain colour. It knows only the objective side of the pheno- 
menon but as to why a certain frequency of vibration gives the 
impression of a particular colour it cannot say. The physical 
world of Science is merely a world of whirling atoms and mole- 
cules and the play of various kinds of energies. The mental world 
which springs forth in our consciousness through the instrumental- 
ity of the physical world is something quite apart from, though 
dependent upon, the physical world. There is a gulf between the 
two which Science has not been able to bridge and will not be 
able to bridge until it takes into account the world of Reality 
which expresses itself through the phenomena of consciousness. 

Patafijali has enumerated nine conditions of the mind or body 
which cause Viksepa and thus serve as obstacles in the path of the 
Togi. Let us briefly consider these before we proceed further. 

(1) Disease: This is obviously a hindrance in the path of 
the Togi because it draws the mind again and again to the physical 
body and makes it difficult to keep it directed inwards. Perfect 
health is a necessity for treading the path of Toga and that is, no 
doubt, one of the reasons why the author has included Asana and 
Prdndydma, two practices of Ha f ha- Toga, in his system. 

(2) Languor: Some people have an apparently healthy 
physical body but lack nerve power so that they always feel below 
par and disinclined to take up any work requiring prolonged exer- 
tion. This chronic fatigue is in many cases psychological in origin 
and due to the absence of any definite and dynamic purpose in life. 
In other cases it is due to some defect in the Prdnamaya Kosa which 
results in an inadequate supply of vital force to the physical body. 
Whatever its cause it acts as an obstacle because it undermines all 
efforts to practice Sadhand. 

(3) Doubt: An unshakeable faith in the efficacy of Toga 
and its methods is a sine qua non for its successful practice. Such faith 



SAMA.DHI PADA 



79 



is needed in achieving success in any line of endeavour but more so 
in this line because of the peculiar conditions under which the 
Togi has to work. In the Divine adventure which he has under- 
taken the objective is unknown and there are no clearly defined 
standards by which he can judge and measure his progress. 
Doubts of various kinds are therefore liable to arise in his mind. 
Is there really any Reality to be realized or is he merely pursuing 
a mirage ? Are the methods he is using really effective ? Are those 
methods the right methods for him ? Has he the capacity to go 
through all the obstacles and reach the goal? These and other 
doubts of a similar nature are liable to assail his mind from time 
to time especially when he is passing through the periods of depres- 
sion \^hich come inevitably in the path of every aspirant. It is 
at these times that he needs Sraddhd- — unshakeable faith in his 
objective, in himself and in the methods which he has adopted. 
It may not be possible to avoid these periods of depression and 
doubt especially in the early stages but it is his behaviour and 
reaction to them which show whether he has true faith or not. 
If he can ignore them even though he feels them, he comes out of 
the shade into the sunshine again and resumes his journey with 
renewed enthusiasm. If he allows these doubts and moods to 
interfere with his Sadhand and relaxes his efforts, they acquire an 
increasing hold on his mind until he is completely side-tracked 
and abandons the path altogether. 

(4) Carelessness: This is another obstacle which besets the 
path of many aspirants for the Togic life. It has the effect of relaxing 
the mind and thus undermines its concentration. Some people 
are careless by nature and when they come into the field, of Toga 
they bring their carelessness with them. Carelessness is a weak- 
ness which prevents a man from achieving eminence in any line 
of endeavour and condemns him to a mediocre life. But in the 
field of Toga it is not only an obstacle but a great danger and the 
careless Togi is like a child who is allowed to play with dynamite. 
He is bound to do himself serious injury sooner or later. No one 
should think of treading this path who has not conquered the 
habit of carelessness and learnt to pay careful attention not only 
to important things of life but also to those which are considered 
unimportant. 



80 



SECTION I (30) 



(5) Laziness : This is another habit which results in a dis- 
tracted condition of the mind. Although it results in the same kind 
of ineffectiveness in life as in the case of languor it is yet different. 
It is a bad mental habit acquired by continued yielding to the 
love of comfort and ease and tendency to avoid exertion. If we 
may say so, languor is a purely physical defect while laziness is 
generally a purely psychological condition. A restoration to health 
automatically cures the former but a prolonged discipline based 
on the execution of hard and difficult tasks is the only means of 
curing the latter. 

(6) Worldly-mindedness: The worldly man is so immersed 
in the interests pertaining to his outer life that he does not get 
time even to think about the real problems of life. And there 
are many people who pass through life without having ever 
given any serious thought to these problems. When a person 
takes to the path of Yoga as a result of the dawning of Viveka 
and of his becoming alive to the illusions of life the momentum 
of the past is still behind him and it is not so easy to shut out 
the interests of the worldly life suddenly and completely. These 
hankerings after the objects of the world still continue to 
trouble him and cause serious distraction in his mind. Of course, 
all depends upon the reality of the Viveka. If we really see the 
illusions which are inherent in the pursuit of worldly objects 
like wealth, honour, name etc. then we lose all attraction for 
them and naturally give up their pursuit. But if the Viveka is 
not real — is of the pseudo-variety — the result of mere ' thinking ', 
then there is constant struggle between the desires which drag the 
mind outside and the will of the Yogi who tries to make the mind 
dive within. Thus, worldly-mindedness can be a serious cause 
of Viksepa. 

(7) Delusion: This means taking a thing for what it is not. 
It is due generally to lack of intelligence and discrimination. A 
Sadhaka may, for example, begin to see lights and hear sounds of 
various kinds during his early practices. These things are very 
spurious and do not mean much and yet there are many Sadhakas 
who get excited about these trivial experiences and begin to think 
they have made great progress. Some think that they have 
reached high states of consciousness or are even foolish enough to 



SAMADHI PADA 



81 



think that they have seen God. This incapacity to assess our 
supernormal experiences at their proper worth is basically due to 
immaturity of soul and those who cannot distinguish between the 
essential and non-essential things in spiritual unfoldment find their 
progress blocked at a very early stage. They tend to get entangled 
in these spurious experiences of a psychic nature and are soon 
side-tracked. It is easy to see that the unhealthy excitement 
which accompanies such undesirable conditions of the mind will 
cause great distraction and prevent it from diving inwards. 

(8) Non-achievement of a state: The essential technique 
of Toga consists, in the earlier stages, in establishing the mind 
firmly in the stages of Dharand, Dhyana and Samadhi, and after 
Samadhi has been attained, in pushing steadily, step by step, into 
the deeper levels of consciousness. In all these stages change 
from one state to another is involved and this is brought about 
by persistent effort of the will. Sometimes this passage is easy 
and comes after a reasonable amount of effort. At other times the 
Yogi seems to make no progress and a dead wall appears to be 
facing him. This failure to obtain a footing in the next stage 
can cause distraction and disturb the perfect equanimity of the 
mind unless the Yogi has developed inexhaustible patience and 
capacity for self-surrender. 

(9) Instability: Another kind of difficulty arises when the 
Yogi can get a foothold in the next stage but cannot retain it for 
long. The mind reverts to its previous stage and a considerable 
amount of effort has to be put forth in order to regain the foothold. 
Of course, in all such mental processes reversions of this nature are 
to a certain extent unavoidable. But it is one thing to lose one's 
foothold in the next stage because only practice makes perfect 
and another thing to lose it because of the inherent fickleness of 
the mind. It is only -when the instability is due to the inherent 
unsteadiness of the mind that Viksepa can be said to be present 
and special treatment is called for. 

It should be noted that the nine obstacles enumerated in this 
Sutra are of a particular type — those which cause Viksepa and thus 
hinder the Yogi in the practice of Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi. 
There can be other kinds of obstacles also. Every serious defect 
of character can become an obstacle. Karma can place obstacles 
6 



82 



SECTION I (30, 31) 



in the path of the aspirant which make the practice of Toga for 
the time being impossible. Attachments to objects, persons or 
ideas frequently stand in the way of many aspirants taking to the 
life of Toga. These different kinds of obstacles are dealt with in 
their proper places. Defects of character, for example, in the 
treatment of Tama-Niyama. 

The reason why Patanjali has dealt here with this class of 
obstacles in particular lies, of course, in the fact that this is the 
Samadhi Pada and he is dealing with all the essential factors 
involved in understanding this important subject. He gives" in 
this Sutra some idea with regard to the nature of obstacles which 
cause Viksepa before dealing in eight subsequent Sutras (1-32-39) 
with the various methods which may be adopted for overcoming 
this tendency. 

Duhkha-daurmanasyangamejayatva-svasa- 
prasvasa viksepa-sahabhuvah. 

<|:g"- pain <*\«tiw despair, depression etc., caused by mental 
sickness ar^spi^ - - shaking of the body; lack of control over the 
body; nervousness ^UHHiHWl: (and) inspiration and expiration ; 
hard breathing faSTT distraction *npT3T: accompanying (symptoms). 

31. (Mental) pain, despair*, nervousness and hard 
breathing are the symptoms of a distracted condition 
of mind. 

After enumerating in the last Sutra those conditions which 
cause Viksepa the author gives in this Sutra a number of symptoms 
by which the presence of Viksepa can be recognized. The first 
of these is pain. The presence of pain either physical or mental 
always shows some serious defect or disharmony in the vehicle. 
Physical pain is a sign of positive disease while mental pain shows 



SAMADHI PADA 



83 



definitely that the mind is not in a natural healthy state. It is 
either in a state of inner conflict, torn between opposite desires or 
under the domination of Klesas. Pain is an indication provided 
by Nature to bring to the notice of the person concerned that all 
is not well with him. But while most people would run to a doctor 
if there is any physical pain very few people think of having their 
mind examined or examining it themselves even when they are 
suffering excruciating mental pain. But that is what is needed 
really. 

When pain is combined with a consciousness of impotence or 
incapacity to remove it effectively it leads to despair, despair then 
leads to nervousness which is merely an outer physical symptom 
of despair. Nervousness when it reaches a certain degree of 
intensity disturbs the breathing because it disorganizes the flow of 
Prank currents. So these four symptoms really represent the four 
stages which follow one another when the mind is in that undesir- 
able condition which causes Viksepa. 

Since they are mere symptoms the proper way to deal with 
them is to treat the mind for the fundamental disease which 
afflicts it. And this will involve a long and tedious course of 
discipline of our whole nature because all parts of our nature are 
inter-related. The whole problem of human suffering and misery 
has been dealt with in Section II by Patanjali in a masterly 
manner in his theory of KleJas. It will be clear to anyone who 
has understood this theory that there can be no cheap but effective 
solution of the problem of human suffering except through the 
conquest of the Great Illusion. As long as this is not achieved 
and the mind remains subject to the illusions of the lower life, 
suffering and misery must remain and the outer symptoms which 
reflect the disordered condition of the mind must continue to 
appear in greater or lesser degree. 

But as has been pointed out already Patanjali is not dealing 
here with the fundamental problem of human suffering and misery 
but with those particular conditions of the mind which produce 
Viksepa and interfere with the practice of Dharand, Dhydna and 
Samadhi. This problem is of a more limited nature and has to be 
tackled by adopting means of more limited and specific nature. 
These are dealt with in the following eight Sutras. 



one 



84 SECTION I (32) 

Tat-pratisedhartham eka-tattvabhyasah . 

?lcT that (there) yid^yi'^H for removal ; for checking qsjr (of) 
cTW principle; truth 3TWRT: practice; intense application. 

32. For removing these obstacles there (should be) 
constant practice of one truth or principle. 

Some commentators have introduced quite unnecessary 
mystification in the interpretation of this Sutra, some going to the 
absurd length of suggesting that the exercises recommended in the 
six subsequent Sutras for removing Viksepa and developing con- 
centration of purpose are methods of practising Samadhil In one 
sense, since Reality touches life at every point, theoretically, there 
can be no limit to the depth into which we can penetrate in 
pursuing any one truth and this can lead to Samadhi. But the 
context in which this Sutra occurs and the nature of the illustrative 
methods which are given in the subsequent Sutras leave no room 
for doubt with regard to its meaning. The object of these exercises 
is not the attainment of Samadhi, for that is sought to be achieved 
by a different clearly defined series of steps outlined in Asfanga 
Toga. The object is obviously the reversal of the tendency of the 
mind to run constantly after a multitude of objects in the outer 
world and to develop the capacity to pursue constantly one objec- 
tive inside within the realm of consciousness. 

It has been pointed out previously that the average man 
lacks not only concentration of purpose but also the capacity to 
keep the mind directed within. Both these are sine qua non for 
the practice of Toga and hence the necessity of developing these 
capacities in a high degree for the aspirant. The removal of the 
obstacles follows naturally when concentration of purpose has been 
developed to a sufficient degree. When a dynamic purpose enters 
the life of a person who has been leading a purposeless life, his 
mental and other forces become gradually polarized and all 
difficulties like those mentioned in 1-30 tend to disappear. But, 



SAMADHI PADA 



85 



of course, the aspirant for Togic life has not only to acquire the 
capacity to pursue an objective with energy and perseverance but 
in addition his objective must be within. The exercises which 
Patanjali has recommended are such that both these capacities 
are developed simultaneously. 

ZTTiTt »J|eHklPHTli|<HKHH I 

Maitrl-karuna-muditopeksanam sukha- 
duhkha-punyapunya-visayanam 
bhavanatas citta-prasadanam. 

A£t friendliness 3JWT compassion nfelT (and) gladness 
S^TFIT indifference ^"joy; happiness g:.^ sorrow; misery W 
virtue srjwj (and) vice fa*prPTt (having for their) objects ^mid : 
by cultivating attitudes (towards) ; by dwelling in mind (upon) 
farT (of) mind STCTT^W clarification; purification. 

33. The mind becomes clarified by cultivating 
attitudes of friendliness, compassion, gladness and 
indifference respectively towards happiness, misery, 
virtue and vice. 

In giving a number of alternative exercises for overcoming 
Viksepa the author begins with two Sutras the relevancy of which, in 
relation to the subject being considered, is not sometimes quite 
clear to students. In the Sutra we are considering Patanjali 
defines the correct attitude of the would-be Togi in the various 
kinds of situations that may arise in his relationship with those 
amongst whom he lives. One of the greatest sources of disturb- 
ance to the mind is our uncontrolled reactions to our human 
environment, to what people do around us and to the pleasant or 
unpleasant conditions in which we get involved. The ordinary 
man has no well-defined principle for the regulation of these 



86 



SECTION I (33) 



reactions. He reacts to these things in a haphazard manner 
according to his whims and moods with the result that he is being 
constantly disturbed by all kinds of violent emotions. Some 
people, finding these emotional reactions unpleasant, decide not to 
react at all and gradually become cold, hard-hearted and indif- 
ferent to those around them. Both these attitudes are undesirable 
and cannot lead to acquiring a calm, gentle and compassionate 
nature in accordance with the requirements of the higher life. 
Spiritual life can go neither with violent reactions nor with cold 
indifference which some misguided stoics recommend to their 
followers. It requires a balanced nature in which our reactions 
are correctly regulated by the highest motives and are in harmony 
with the Great Law. The point to note here is that the develop- 
ment of a hard and callous nature, which is indifferent to the 
happiness and suffering of others, is no real solution of the problem 
of mental equilibrium and the freedom from disturbances which 
is thus acquired is more apparent than real because it is artificial 
and against the law of Love. Besides, there is the danger of the 
Yogi, who allows himself to become callous drifting into the Left- 
hand path and creating for himself and others untold suffering. 

Patafijali has not only pointed out the necessity for the Yogi 
of controlling and regulating his reactions to his environment but 
has also laid down the general principle on which this regulation 
is to be based. This principle is, of course, derived from the laws 
of psychology and practical experience in dealing with the prob- 
lem of adjusting ourselves to our environment. It ensures for 
the Yogi both the equilibrium of mind and freedom from entangle- 
ments which he needs for the steady pursuit of his object. 

The principle on the basis of which the Yogi has to regulate 
his attitudes and reactions is quite clear from the Sutra but there 
is one point on which doubt may arise in the mind of the student. 
Patafijali prescribes indifference towards vice. To some it may 
appear that this is not in accordance with the highest ideals of 
spiritual life and an attitude of active help and compassion towards 
the wicked would be better than that of mere indifference. This 
objection seems quite reasonable and incidents may be quoted 
from the lives of great spiritual teachers and saints in support of 
this argument. But we have to remember that this Sutra is not. 



SAMADHI PAJ5A 



87 



meant to prescribe a code of conduct for people in general or for 
those who have become Enlightened and are thus in a position to 
serve as spiritual teachers. It is a code of conduct recommended 
for the practical student of Yoga who is an aspirant for Enlighten- 
ment. He is engaged in the pursuit of an objective of an extra- 
ordinarily difficult nature and he cannot afford to divert his 
energies for the purpose of reforming others. According to the 
Eastern tradition and conception of spirituality, active work for 
the spiritual regeneration of others comes after a person has gained 
at least a certain degree of enlightenment himself. If we go out 
to reform others while we ourselves are bound by all kinds of 
illusions and limitations, we are not likely to gain much success in 
our endeavour and may seriously jeopardize our own progress. 
The aspirant for Yoga cannot frown upon the wicked because that 
would tend to arouse hatred and have undesirable repercussions 
on his own mind. He cannot show sympathy towards them be- 
cause that would be encouraging vice. So the only course left 
open to him is to adopt an attitude of indifference. 

The result of following the rule given in this Sutra is to bring 
about clarification of the mind and to remove one of the causes of 
mental disturbance for the beginner. AH those distortions and 
complexes which the average man develops in his conflicting 
relations with others must be combed out and the psyche made 
healthy and harmonious. Otherwise, Viksepa will continue to 
trouble him and make the practice of Yoga impossible. 

Besides a clarified mind, another essential requisite for the 
pratice of Yoga is a strong and restful nervous system. How this 
can be ensured is indicated in the next Sutra. 

Pracchardana-vidharanabhyam va 
pranasya. 

xw-i (by) ejection; expiration -f^JTCTTRf (and) retention ; 
holding ^T or MI«I^T of breath. 

34. Or by the expiration and retention of breath. 



88 



SECTION I (34, 35) 



The subject of Prandyama has been dealt with in 11-49-53. In 
the Sutra given above Patafijali has referred only to some preli- 
minary practices which have only a limited objective, namely the 
purification of the Kadis. These Kadis are channels along which 
the currents of Prana or vitality flow in the Prdnamaya Kosa. If 
these channels are not quite clear and the currents of. Prana do not 
flow in them smoothly, various kinds of nervous disturbances are 
produced. These manifest chiefly in a general feeling of physical 
and mental restlessness which causes Viksepa. This condition can 
be removed by practising one of the well-known breathing exercis'es 
for the purification of the Kadis (Kadi Suddhi). Since Kumbhaka 
does not play any part in these exercises and no strain of any kind 
is involved they are quite harmless though highly beneficial for 
the nervous system. If they are practised correctly for long periods 
of time and the Yogic regime of life is followed at the same time, 
the physical body becomes light and full of vitality and the mind 
calmand restful. 

These exercises should, however, not be taken as variants of 
deep-breathing which has no other effect except that of increasing 
the intake of oxygen in the body and thus promoting health. They 
come somewhere between deep-breathing and Prandyama proper 
which aims at gaining complete control of the Pranic currents in 
the body. This point will become clear when we are dealing with 
the subject of Prandyama in Section II. 

It should be noted that Patafijali does not consider these 
preliminary exercises for the purification of Kadis as Prandyama. : 
He defines Prandyama in 11-49 and according to that definition 
Kumbhaka, the cessation of inspiration and expiration, is an 
essential part of Prandyama. 

VisayavatI va pravrttir utpanna manasah 
sthiti-nibandhani. 

fWT^fr sensuous m or JHfd: functioning; occupation; 
pursuit Ki<Mt{\ arisen; born J^RT: of the mind ftq% steadiness 
fWst'fi binder (of) ; helpful in establishing. 



SAMADHI PADA 



89 



35. Coming into activity of (higher) senses also 
becomes helpful in establishing steadiness of the mind. 

The next means which Patafijali gives for making the mind 
steady is its absorption in some superphysical sensuous cognition. 
Such cognition may be brought about in a variety of ways, for 
example, by concentrating the mind on certain vital centres in the 
body. A typical example of this method is Laya-Toga in which 
the mind is concentrated on Kdda or superphysical sounds which 
can be heard at certain points within the body. In fact, this 
method of bringing the mind to rest is considered so effective that 
a separate branch of Toga based on this principle has grown up. 

How far this unification of the mind with Kdda which forms 
the basis of Laya-Toga can take the Sddhaka in his search for 
Reality, it is difficult to say. Since this method forms the basis of 
a separate and independent branch of Toga, it is possible some Yogis 
were able to make considerable advance in their search by this 
method. But it is very probable that Laya-Yoga merges with Raja- 
Yoga at one stage or another like many other minor systems of 
Toga and is useful only in the preliminary work of making the 
mind steady and tranquil and giving the Sddhaka direct experience 
of some superphysical phenomena. Anyhow, the usefulness of 
this method in overcoming Viksepa and preparing the mind for the 
advanced stages of Yogic practice is beyond question. 

\\. faj*fl«M ^T **fifdfc*kfi I 

Visoka va jyotismati. 

fayfl+l sorrowless; serene 3T or; also ^iflfd^cft luminous. 

36. Also (through) serene or luminous (states 
experienced within) . 

In Laya-Yoga the mind is made steady by absorbing it in 
Andhata Sabda. The same object can be gained by bringing it in 
contact with other superphysical sensations or states of conscious- 
ness. Man's constitution, including both the physical and super- 
physical bodies is very complex and there are a large number of 



90 



SECTION I (36, 37) 



methods available for establishing partial contact between the 
lower and the higher vehicles. Some of these methods depend 
upon purely artificial aids, others on the Japa of a Mantra and 
still others on meditation of a particular type. Which of these 
methods will be adopted by a Sddhaka will depend upon the 
Samskdras which he brings from previous lives and the capacity 
and temperament of the teacher who initiates him in these preli- 
minary practices. As a result of such practice the Sddhaka may 
begin to see an unusual light within him or feel an utter sense of 
peace and tranquillity. These experiences while of no great 
significance in themselves can hold the mind by their attractive 
power and gradually bring about the required condition of 
steadiness. 

The Sddhaka should, however, keep in his mind the purpose of 
these practices. In the first place, he should not attach to them 
undue importance and significance and begin to imagine that he 
is making great progress on the path of Toga. He is learning merely 
the ABC of Yogic science. In the second place, he should not 
allow these experiences to become a mere source of emotional and 
mental satisfactions. Many people begin to use such practices as 
a dope and an escape from the stress and strain of ordinary life. 
If such wrong attitudes are adopted these practices frequently 
become a hindrance instead of a help in the path of the Sddhaka. 

Vlta-raga-visayam va cittam. 

=fld<HI a human being who has transcended human passions 
or attachment -faqi)^ (having for its) object 3T or; also RrlH 
the mind. 

37. Also the mind fixed on those who arc free 
from attachment (acquires steadiness). 

Vitardgas are those souls who have conquered human passions 
and risen above Raga-Dve$a. Meditation on the life and character 
of such a soul will naturally help the Sddhaka to acquire freedom 



SAMADHI PADA 



91 



from Raga-Dvesa himself and thus develop serenity and steadiness 
of mind. It is a well-known law of life that we tend to reproduce 
in our life the ideas which constantly occupy our mind. The 
effect is heightened very greatly if we deliberately select some 
virtue and meditate upon it constantly. The rationale of this 
law used in character-building has been discussed in dealing with 
III -24 and it is unnecessary to elaborate the point here. But we 
should note that Pataftjali recommends meditation not on an 
abstract virtue but on the virtue as embodied in a human person- 
ality. There is a definite reason for this. In the first place, a 
beginner who is still trying to acquire steadiness of mind is not 
likely to derive much benefit from meditation on an abstract 
virtue. The association of a beloved human or divine personality 
with a virtue increases enormously the attractive power of that 
virtue and hence its influence on our life. Secondly, earnest 
meditation on such a personality puts us in rapport with that 
personality and brings about a flow of power and influence which 
accelerates our progress. The object of meditation may be one's 
Master, or a great Spiritual Teacher or one of the Divine 
Incarnations. 

\*> HMfHsil*IMI<HHH ^T I 

Svapna-nidra-jnanalambanam va. 

*3^T dream state fr?r state of dreamless sleep mUT (and) 
knowledge -ajMMHH (having for its) support; that on which a 
thing rests or depends ^T also. 

38. Also (the mind) depending upon the knowl- 
edge derived from dreams or dreamless sleep (will 
acquire steadiness) . 

This Sutra giving another method of overcoming Viksepa 
seems to have been completely misunderstood and many commen- 
tators have tried to explain it away with a lot of rigmarole. The 
clue to the meaning of the Sutra lies in the significance of the two 



92 



SECTION I (38) 



words Svapna and Nidrd. If wc interpret the Sulra as ' meditating 
on the knowledge obtained in dreams or dreamless sleep ' it seems 
to be meaningless. What useful purpose will be served by medi- 
tation on the chaotic images which pass through the brain in the 
dream state nobody has cared to enquire. And even if we concede 
the point in relation to the dream state in which there are some 
images, though chaotic, what shall we say about the dreamless 
state in which the mind appears to be utterly blank? How is the 
Sadhaka troubled with Viksepa to utilize this blank condition of the 
mind for developing one-pointedness ? 

The fact is that Svapna and Jfidrd do not refer to the condition 
of the brain during sleep but to the subtler vehicles into which 
consciousness passes during the period of sleep. When we go to 
sleep the Jivdtmd leaves the physical body and begins to function 
in the next subtler vehicle. Very partial contact is maintained 
with the physical body to enable it to carry on its normal physio- 
logical activities, but the conscious mind is really functioning in 
the subtler vehicle. Many people called psychics have a natural 
capacity for passing out of the physical body into the next subtler 
world and bringing back into the physical brain more or less vague 
knowledge of their experiences in that world. The common man, 
though he is in the same subtler world during sleep cannot generally 
bring back any memory of his experiences because his brain is 
not in that peculiar condition required for this purpose. If any 
mental images are transmitted they become distorted and mixed 
up with the images which are produced by the automatic activity 
of the brain and the ordinary chaotic and meaningless dream is 
the result. Sometimes, the Jivdtmd is able to impress some idea or 
experience on the brain and a significant dream results but this is 
very rare. All such mental activity is included in the Svapna state. 

There is a deeper state of consciousness underlying the Svapna 
state corresponding to a still more subtler world into which a 
person may slip during sleep. This corresponds to the higher 
sub-planes of the astral world or in rare cases to the lower sub- 
planes of the mental world. When this happens the physical 
brain is completely cut off from the activities of the mind and 
naturally becomes a blank. This state is called technically Nidrd. 
It will he seen that though in this state the brain is blank the 



sAmadhi pAda 



93 



mind is working at a higher level and dealing with phenomena of 
a subtler nature. 

Now, it is possible by special training and practice to bring 
down into the physical brain a memory of experiences undergone 
in these subtler worlds corresponding to the Svapna and Jfidrd 
states. Under these conditions the brain is able to transmit the 
mental images without any distortion and the knowledge obtained 
under these circumstances is reliable. When this can be done a 
great deal of useful information can be gathered and work done 
on these subtler planes during the period of sleep. The waking 
life gradually merges with the life in so-called sleep and there is 
no abrupt break which usually takes place on leaving the body or 
coming back to it after sleep. It is this definite and useful knowl- 
edge about these superphysical planes which can be acquired 
during sleep that is referred to in this Sutra and not the chaotic 
dreams or the condition of void which are experienced by the 
ordinary man. The gathering and bringing down of this knowl- 
edge into the waking state becomes a matter of absorbing interest 
and provides one method of overcoming the condition of Viksepa. 
In this case also the mind becomes more and more one-pointed 
and engrossed in an objective which is ' inside '. 

It should be remembered, however, that this kind of mental 
activity has nothing to do with Samddhi. It is allied to psychism 
and differs from it in the fact that it is the result of definite 
training and therefore the knowledge which is acquired is more 
useful and reliable. 



3£. 

Yathabhimata-dhyanad va. 
q*TT as 3tfro desired; agreeable RTFTT^ by meditation JfT or. 
39. Or by meditation as desired. 

After giving a number of methods for overcoming the condi- 
tion of Viksepa Patanjali concludes this subject by saying that the* 
Sadhaka may adopt any method of meditation according to his 



94 



SECTION I (39, 40) 



predilection. This should bring home to the student that the 
practices recommended by the author are merely means to a defi- 
nite end which should always be kept in mind. Any other method 
which serves to make the mind steady and one-pointed can be 

adopted. 

Another idea which is implicit in the Sutra is that the method 
chosen for this purpose should be in accordance with one's 
temperament. In that way the mind is helped to acquire the 
habit of one-pointedness by the natural attraction for the object 
of pursuit. Thus a Sddhaka with clairvoyant tendencies will find 
the method given in 1-38 not only attractive but helpful. Another 
with an emotional temperament will feel a natural predilection 
for the method given in 1-37. Such predilections are the result of 
training and experiences in previous lives and generally point to 
the ' ray ' of the individual or the fundamental type to which he 

belongs. ... 

A little experimentation may be permissible in the selection 
of the method but trying one method after another should not be 
allowed to become a habit, for this will aggravate the very malady 
which is sought to be cured. 

Paramanu-parama-mahattvanto 'sya 
vasikarah. 

(Rtt- ultimate; smallest W% atom <TC*T- (and) ultimate; great- 
est TT^T largeness ; infinity ap^r: ending (in); extending (up to) 
sr^T his (of the yogi) 4HH+K: mastery. 

40. His mastery extends from the finest atom to 
the greatest infinity. 

In this Sutra Patanjali has summed up the powers which can 
be acquired by the practice of Yoga. He says, in fact, that there 
is no limit to the powers of the Yogi. This may appear to the 



SAMADHI PADA 



95 



modern man a tall claim and he may dismiss it as another illustra- 
tion of the hyperboles found scattered in Eastern books like the 
Purdnas. That Yoga confers some powers on its votaries he will be 
prepared to concede, to deny this would be to fly in the face of 
facts within the experience of a large number of intelligent people. 
But to claim for the Yogi omnipotence — which is what the state- 
ment in thi^ Sutra really amounts to — will appear an absurd 
exaggeration of facts. 

Taken by itself the statement made in this Sutra does appear 
too sweeping. But we must remember that Patanjali has devoted 
almost one whole Section to the subject of Siddhis or powers 
acquired through Yoga. The present Sutra is therefore expected 
to be read in the light of all that is said later about Siddhis in 
Section III. The generalization contained in it is therefore not 
an unqualified statement and if studied along with Section III 
and the general remarks made in dealing with 111-16 will appear 
quite rational and intelligible. 

Ksina-vrtter abhijatasyeva maner grahitr- 
grahana-grahyesu tatstha-tadanjana ta 
samapattih. 

%fl u Hti: of him in whose case the modifications of the mind 
have been almost annihilated 3rfiMldf4 of transparent; well- 
polished ^ like *TT: of the jewel or crystal il^d (in) cognizer; 
subject JX^l cognition; the relation between the subject and object 
yi^JM (and) cognized objects cToFT on which it rests ^T^jjTffiT the 
taking of the form or colour of that tmmftl: consummation; 
outcome; fusion. 

41. In the case of one whose Citta-Vrttis have been 
almost annihilated, fusion or entire absorption in one 
another of the cognizer, cognition and cognized is 



9& 



SECTION I (41) 



brought about as in the case of a transparent jewel 
(resting on a coloured surface) . 



This is one of the most important and interesting Sutras in the 
book for many reasons. Firstly, it throws light on the nature of 
Samddhi as perhaps no other Sutra does; secondly, it enables us to 
get some insight into the nature of consciousness and mental 
perception, and lastly, it provides a clue to the modus operandi of 
the many powers which can be wielded by the Togi. 

If we are to understand the underlying significance of the 

Sutra we should first recall the philosophical conception upon 

which it is based. According to this conception the manifested 

Universe is an emanation of an Ultimate Reality and its different 

planes, visible and invisible, may be considered to be formed by a 

sort of progressive condensation or involution of consciousness. 

At each stage of the progressive condensation a subjective-objective 

relationship is established between the more condensed and less 

condensed aspects of consciousness, the less condensed assuming 

the subjective and the more condensed the objective role The 

Ultimate Reality at the basis of the manifested Universe is the 

only purely subjective principle while all other partial expressions 

of that Reality in the realm of manifestation have a double 

subjective-objective role, being subjective towards those expressions 

which are more involved and objective towards those less involved. 

Not only is there at each point the possibility of this meeting of 

subjective and objective but wherever and whenever such meeting 

takes place a definite relation is established between the two. So 

the manifested Universe is really not a duality but a triplicity and 

that is how "every manifestation of Reality at any level or in any 

sphere has three aspects. These three aspects corresponding to 

the subjective and objective sides of manifestation and the relation 

which must exist between them are referred to in the present 

Sutra as Grahitr, Grahana and Grahya and may be translated into 

English by sets of words such as knower, knowing, known or 

cognize^ cognition, cognized or perceiver, perception, perceived. 

This fundamental fact underlying manifestation, that the 

One has become the Three, is the basis of the mysterious identity 



SAMADHI PADA 



97 



which exists between these three apparently different components 
of the triplicity. It is because the One Reality has become the 
Three that it is possible to bring about a fusion of the Three into 
One, and it is this kind of fusion which is the essential technique 
and secret of Samddhi. This fusion can take place at four different 
levels of consciousness corresponding to Vilarka, Vicara. Ananda and 
Asmita stages of Samprajnata Samddhi but- the principle underlying 
the fusion of the Three into One is the sanie at all the levels and 
the result also is the same, namely the attainment by the knower 
of perfect and complete knowledge of the known. .-. 

Before we take up the question of bringing about this fusion at 
different levels let us first consider the very apt simile used by Patafi- 
jali to bring home to the student the essential nature of Samddhi. 

If we place a small piece of ordinary stone on a sheet of 
coloured paper the stone is not at all affected by the coloured 
light coming from the paper. It stands out against the paper as 
it was owing to its imperviousness to this light. If we place a 
colourless crystal on the same piece of paper we immediately see 
a difference in its behaviour towards the light coming from the 
paper. It absorbs some of the light and thus appears at least 
partially assimilated with the paper. The degree of absorption 
will depend upon the transparency of the crystal and the freedom 
from defects in its substance. The more perfect the crystal the 
more completely will it transmit the light and become assimilated 
with the coloured paper. A crystal of perfectly transparent glass 
with no internal defects or colour will become so completely 
assimilated with the paper as almost to disappear in the light 
coming from it. It will be there but in an invisible form and 
emitting only the light of the paper upon which it is placed. We 
should note that it is the freedom of the crystal from any defects, 
characteristics, marks or qualities of its own which enables it to 
become completely assimilated with the paper on which it is 
placed. Even a trace of colour in an otherwise perfect crystal will 
prevent, its perfect assimilation. 

The behaviour of a mind in relation to an object of contem- 
plation is remarkably similar to the behaviour of the crystal in 
relation to the coloured paper. Any activity, impression, or bias 
which the mind has apart from the object of contemplation will 
7 



98 



SECTION I (41) 



stand in the way of its becoming fused with it completely. It is 
only when the mind has, as it were, annihilated itself completely 
and destroyed its independent identity that it can become assimi- 
lated with the object of contemplation and shine with the piire 
truth enshrined in that object. 

l*et us consider for a while the various factors which prevent 
this process of assimilation. First of all come the various tenden- 
cies, some almost instinctive, in character, which impart strong 
biases to the mind and make it flow naturally and powerfully along 
certain predetermined lines. Such tendencies are, for example, 
those of accumulating possessions, indulging in all kinds of enjoy- 
ments, attractions and repulsions. Such tendencies which are 
derived from desires of various kinds tend to throw up in the mind 
mental images and temptations in accordance with their own 
nature. All such tendencies are sought to be eliminated from the 
mind of the aspirant by the practice of Tama, Niyama and Vairdgya. 
Then come the sensuous impressions derived from the contact of 
the sense-organs with the external world. Along the avenues of 
the sense-organs flows a continuous current of impressions into the 
mind, modifying it continually into a never ending series of 
images. These impressions are cut off when Samddhi is to be 
practised by means of Asana, Prdndydma and Pratydhdra. The Togi 
has now to deal only with the inherent activity of the mind itself, 
the activity which it can carry on with the help of the images 
stored in its memory and its power to arrange and re-arrange 
those images in innumerable patterns. This kind of activity is 
sought to be controlled and canalized in Dhdrand and Dhydna and 
the mind made to direct its activity solely in one channel. There 
is nothing left now in the mind, there is nothing which can arise in 
the mind except the ' seed ' of Samyama or the object of contempla- 
tion. But the mind is still separate from the object and as long as 
it retains its subjective role it cannot become one with the object. 
This awareness of the mind of itself which stands in its way of 
becoming fused with the object of contemplation and ' shining ' 
solely with the truth hidden within the object is eliminated in 
Samddhi. How this self-awareness is dissolved to bring about the 
complete fusion of the knower, known and knowing is the subject 
of the subsequent Sutras. 



SAMADHI PADA 



99 



In considering the simile of the perfectly transparent crystal 
which is placed on coloured paper we should note that though the 
crystal is free from its own defects and can thus become assimilated 
with the coloured paper, still, the coloured light from the paper 
colours it. So, it is still not quite free from defect. An external 
influence still modifies it though this is of a very subtle nature. It 
is only when it is placed on a piece of white paper which is giving 
out white light that the crystal will shine with white light which 
includes all colours in harmonious blending and is the symbol of 
the Whole Truth or Reality. 

Similarly, in Sabija Samddhi although all the other defects of 
the mind have been eliminated one defect is still there. This 
defect is its permeation with the partial truth of the 'seed ' of 
contemplation. Compared with the Whole Truth which includes 
and integrates all partial truths, the partial truth of the ' seed ' 
acts as a hindrance and prevents the mind from shining with the 
Whole Truth. So, as long as the partial truth of any ' seed ', 
gross or subtle, occupies the mind the Whole Truth of the One 
Reality cannot shine through it. For the realization of the Whole 
Truth which can be found only in the consciousness of Purusa, 
according to Togic terminology, it is necessary to remove even the 
impression of any partial truth realized in Sabija Samddhi. This is 
accomplished by the practice of Nirbija Samddhi or ' Samddhi with- 
out seed '. The transparent and perfect crystal of the mind can 
then shine with the pure white Light of Truth. It will be seen, 
therefore, that in Sabija Samddhi the Vrttis of the mind are replaced 
by pure but partial knowledge of a particular aspect of Reality 
but in Nirbija Samddhi this pure but partial knowledge is replaced 
by the Reality or consciousness of Purusa itself. The mind has 
merged in the One Reality and exists unperceived only to radiate 
its unimaginable effulgence. 

What has been said above with regard to the conditions 
which must be fulfilled before the fusion of the knower with the 
known can be brought about in Samddhi should make it clear that 
the Togic technique has to be adopted as a whole and not piece- 
meal. If, for example, the ordinary desires have not been elimi- 
nated and merely curbed, it is impossible to practise Samddhi. 
These desires will continue to exert unconscious pressure and 



100 



SECTION I (41) 



throw up all kinds of images in the mind and it will not be 
possible to maintain under these conditions the uninterrupted and 
tranquil state of the mind in which alone Samadhi can be practised. 
This state cannot be brought about by the mere exertion of will- 
power as some people suppose, for the exertion of will-power on a 
mind agitated by even sub-conscious desires is bound to produce 
mental strain, and a mind und£r strain which may be inappreci- 
able, is quite unfit for the practice of Samadhi. The tranquillity 
Which is a pre-requisite for Samadhi is a condition of extraordinary 
and habitual stability, and real stability cannot exist where there 
is strain. It is necessary to emphasize these facts again and again 
because aspirants who are not familiar with the realities of Togic 
life plunge directly into the practice of meditation without any 
preparation whatsoever and then begin to fret and wonder why 
they do not make any progress. The practice of higher Toga 
requires a thorough and all-round preparation extending over 
long periods of time. This does not mean, of course, that the 
aspirant should not make a beginning with only a few simple 
practices and gradually extend the area of his endeavour until he 
has mastered the preparatory lessons. 

There is one word in this Sutra whose significance should be 
noted. This is Ksiria. This word means ' attenuated ' or 
' weakened '. It does not mean ' annihilated ' or completely ' dead'. 
In performing Samyama in Sabija Samadhi there is always a ' seed ' 
present in the mind. So the mind cannot be said to be without 
Vrtti or modification.. It is only when Nirbija Samadhi is practised 
that the mind becomes without Vrtti. It is true that in the ulti- 
mate phase of each of the Vitarka, Vicdra, Ananda and Asmita stages 
of Samprajnata Samadhi the partial truth which shines forth through 
the mind can hardly be called a Vrtti in the ordinary sense. Still, 
we cannot say that the mind is present in an unmodified condition 
for the light of the partial truth as explained above still colours 
the mind. The change from the ordinary condition of the mind 
in which all kinds of transformation are continually taking place 
to the condition in which only one object continues to occupy the 
mind is called Samadhi Parinama in III- 11 and the final state 
reached in the transformation can best be described as one in 
which the Vrttis of the mind have become Ksina. But it should 



SAMADHI PADA 



101 



be obvious that this does not mean complete annihilation or dis- 
appearance of the Vrttis as suggested by some commentators. 

Tatra sabdartha-jnana-vikalpaih sam- 
kirna savitarka. 

rlW there; in it 5I«5 (with) word 3f«r real meaning ; true knowl- 
edge of the object which the Yogi wants ?TFT ordinary knowledge 
based on sense perceptions and reasoning fa+?M: (and) alternation 
between different alternatives owing to doubt or uncertainty y<fc\<JlT 
mixed up ; confused; unresolved ; involved *lfad+T a state of Sama- 
dhi characterized by Vitarka (see 1-17 and 11-19). 

42. Savitarka Samadhi is that in which knowledge 
based only on words, real knowledge and ordinary knowl- 
edge based on sense perception or reasoning are present 
in a mixed state and the mind alternates between them. 

In dealing with the first three Sutras of Section III the three 
purely mental processes of Dharana, Dkyana and Samadhi have been 
explained in detail. In 1-41 the essential nature of Samadhi has 
been discussed. But it is necessary to note that the word Samadhi 
is not used for any specific or definite state of the mind. It stands 
for a very wide range of super-conscious states of the mind which 
lead to and end in Kaivalya. The state of Samadhi must be attained 
before entry into the higher realms of consciousness is possible. 
It ushers the Yogi into those realms but the investigation of those 
realms and the mastery of the forces and powers which work on 
those realms has still to be accomplished by the Yogi. It will be 
seen therefore that the mental state defined in III-3 is merely a 
preliminary condition which qualifies the Yogi to enter upon this 
task of investigation and control just as a Master's degree of a 
university qualifies a student to enter upon a course of independ- 
ent scientific research. In the ten Sutras beginning with 1-42 



102 



SECTION I (42) 



some further light is thrown upon the technique of Samadhi which 
has to do with the investigation and mastery of these realms on 
the one hand and the realization, of Reality which lies beyond 
those realms on the other. Samadhi with the former objective is 
called Sabija Samadhi and that with the latter objective JVirbija 
Samadhi. 

When the Yogi has mastered the technique of Samadhi as given 
in 1-3 and can perform Samyama on anything which can become 
an object of Samyama, and of which the inner reality has to be 
discovered, the question arises: How does he make further pro-" 
gress? How does he utilize the power which he has so far acquired 
for the investigation and mastery of the higher realms of existence 
which he can now contact through his subtler vehicles? 

The technique of these further stages of progress is hinted at 
in 1-42-51. It is not given in detail because no one who has not 
gone through the Yogic discipline and reached the advanced stage 
where he can perform Samyama can really understand these things 
even theoretically. The Sutras mentioned above should therefore 
be understood not to embody the technique of the higher stages 
of Samadhi but merely as pointed to these stages which exist and 
their relative position in the line of progress. They are suggestive, 
, not explanatory. They are like the sketch map of a country 
which a traveller may intend to explore. Such a sketch map 
merely gives the relative position of the different parts of the 
country and the direction in which the traveller should proceed in 
order to reach his goal. But something more is needed for explor- 
ing a country than a mere sketch map. 

Before we proceed to consider the above mentioned Sutras let 
us first try to understand the distinction between Sabija and Nirbija 
Samadhis. In connection with 1-17 on Samprajnata Samadhi it was 
pointed out that this kind of ' Samadhi has four stages. These 
stages represent, as has been explained already, the four distinct 
and distinguishable levels at which consciousness functions through 
the four subtler vehicles and corresponding to the four stages of 
Gunas mentioned in 11-19. It is also pointed out in connection 
with III-5 that the higher consciousness functioning at those levels 
in a state of Samadhi is quite different from the ordinary mental 
consciousness with which we are familiar and is called Prajna. 



SAMADHI PADA 



103 



That is why Samadhi of this class is called Samprajnata. All these 
four stages of Samprajnata Samadhi are comprised in Sabija Samadhi 
as pointed out in 1-46. 

Why is Samadhi pertaining to these four stages called Sabija 
Samadhi? The clue to this question lies in the meaning of the 
word Bija or seed. What is the essential form of a seed? It is a 
conglomeration of different kinds of matter arranged in different 
layers, the outermost layer forming the protective and least essen- 
tial part and the innermost layer or core forming the real or 
essential part of the whole set. So that, in order to get at the 
essential part or real substance of the seed we have to tear open 
the different layers one after another until we reach the core. 

The general constitution of a seed described above will show 
at once the appropriateness of calling any Samadhi of the Sampra- 
jnata type. Sabija Samadhi. Samyama in Samprajnata Samadhi is 
always performed on some ' object ' which is called a ' seed ' 
because it has different layers of meaning, etc. covering an essential 
core which is the reality of the object. We can come into touch 
with the different layers of the object or ' seed ' by splitting it 
open, as it were, mentally through the technique of Samadhi. 
Each successive stage of Samadhi reveals to our consciousness a 
different and deeper layer of the reality of the object and by 
continuing the process of Samyama through the successive stages 
we ultimately arrive at the innermost reality of the object. Each 
stage of Samadhi lays bare only one layer of the total reality hidden 
within the object and the process of penetration may have to be 
pushed in some cases through all the four stages before the ultimate 
reality hidden within the object is revealed. 

But though there are four stages in Sabija Samadhi and it may 
be necessary to pass through all these four stages before the object 
on which Samyama is performed is revealed in its totality, this does 
not mean that every object on which Samyana can be performed 
is sufficiently complex to require going through all the four stages. 
Different objects differ in their complexity or subtlety, some being 
more complex and having more subtle counterparts than others 
as is explained in dealingjwith III-6. Patahjali has not discussed 
systematically and in detail the different types of ' seeds ' on 
which Samyama can be performed and the method of c splitting 



104 



SECTION I (42) 



them open ' in Samddhi but a study of the Sutras given in the 
latter portion of Section III will give the student a fairly good 
idea of the large variety of objects which are taken up for Samyama 
in Togic practice. A careful study of these Sutras will not only 
give the student some idea with regard to the different purposes 
of Sabija and Nirbija Samddhi but also throw some light on the 
technique of Samddhi. It will help him to get a clearer insight 
into the meaning of the two rather enigmatic Sutras 1-42-43 in 
which alone Patanjali has given some definite information with 
regard to the mental processes involved in Samddhi. 

Before we proceed to discuss these two Sutras let us first 
consider a few conclusions which may be drawn from a general 
study of the objects (Visaya) upon which Samyama is performed and 
the results which accrue from this practice. These conclusions 
may be stated very briefly as follows: 

(1) If two things are related as cause and effect then by 
performing Samyama on the effect it is possible to have knowledge 
of the underlying cause or vice versa as for example in III- 16. 

(2) If certain phenomena leave an impression on any 
medium it is possible to come into touch with the phenomena by 
reviving the impressions through Samyama as for example in 111-18. 

(3) If a particular principle in nature finds expression in a 
particular phenomenon then by performing Samyama on the 
phenomenon, it is possible to know directly the underlying 
principle, as for example in 111-28 or 111-29. 

(4) If a particular object is the expression of an archetype 
then by performing Samyama on the object it is possible to have 
direct knowledge of the archetype as for example in 111-30. 

(5) If a particular centre in the body is an organ of a 
higher vehicle, faculty etc. then by performing Samyama on the 
centre direct contact is established with the vehicle, faculty etc. as 
for example in 111-33 or 111-35. 

(6) If a thing exists in several degrees of subtlety, one 
derived from the other in a series, then by performing Samyama on 
the outermost or least subtle form it is possible to gain knowledge 
of all the forms, step by step, as for example in 111-45. 

A careful consideration of the facts mentioned above will show 
that Samyama is really a means of passing from the outer expression 



SAMADHI PADA 



105 



to the reality within whatever may be the nature of the relation- 
ship between the outer expression and the inner reality. Since 
the reality underlying all objects is contained in the Divine Mind 
and the object of Samyama in Sabija Samddhi is to know this reality 
it follows that what the Yogi does in Samyama is to sink into his 
own consciousness until he reaches the level of Divine Mind in 
which the reality of the object is to be found. The ' seed ' on 
which Samyama is performed merely determines the line along 
which consciousness has to sink. This may be illustrated by the 
following diagram: 




'* °FHU^^ 



Fig. 5 

A, B, C arc different objects which can serve as ' seeds ' of Sabija 
Samddhi. A', B', C are respectively the realities of these objects 
which can be found in the Divine Mind through Samyama. O is 
the Centre of Divine Consciousness. It will be seen that in every 
case the essential process is the same, namely, proceeding from the 
periphery along a radius to the centre until the intervening circle 
is reached. But different objects which are represented by different 
points on the outer circle make it necessary to proceed along 
different radii to the centre. In proceeding in this manner con- 
sciousness automatically touches the reality of the particular object 
when it reaches the level of the Divine Mind. So the ' seed ' 
merely determines the diiection along which consciousness has to 
sink in order to reach the corresponding reality in the Divine 



106 



SECTION I (42) 



Mind. It does not make any difference as far as the essential 
process of Samyama is concerned but merely guides the conscious- 
ness to the reality which is the object of the search. 

In Nirbija Samadhi the aim of the Yogi is the Centre cf Divine 
Consciousness represented by O in the diagram. In reaching the 
point O he must proceed along a radius and must cross the in- 
tervening states of consciousness. That is why Nirbija Samadhi can 
come only after Sabija Samadhi when all the stages of SamprajMta 
Samadhi have been crossed. 

Having cleared the ground to a certain extent let us now 
proceed to consider 1-42 which throws some light on the technique 
of splitting open the ' seed ' of « Sabija ' Samadhi. This Sutra deals 
with the mental processes involved in the very first stage of Samadhi 
and may best be understood in relation to a concrete object 
having a name and form. We are so used to taking all things 
which come within the range of our experience for granted that 
we never pay any attention to the mysteries which are obviously 
hidden within the simplest of objects. Every physical object 
which we can perceive through our sense organs is really a con- 
glomerate of several kinds of mental impressions which can be 
sorted out to a certain extent by a process of mental analysis on the 
basis of our knowledge of sensuous perception and other facts 
discovered by Science. Let us take for the sake of illustration a 
sijmple concrete object like a rose. Our knowledge regarding a 
rose is a mixture in which facts like those given below enter: 

(1) It has a name which has been chosen arbitrarily and 
has no natural relationship with the object. 

(2) It has a form, colour, odour etc. which we can perceive 
through our sense-organs. These will vary from rose to rose but 
there is an irreducible minimum of qualities which are common 
to all roses and which make a rose a rose. 

(3) It is a particular combination of certain atoms and 
molecules (or electrons at a deeper level) distributed in a certain 
manner in space. The mental image which is formed in our 
mind on the basis of this scientific knowledge is quite different 
from the mental image derived from the sense-organs. 

(4) It is a particular specimen of an archetype, all roses 
which come into being conforming to this archetypal rose. 



SAMADHI PADA 



107 



A consideration of some of the facts given above will show to 
the student how mixed up our ideas are regarding even common 
objects with which we come in contact every day. Our true 
knowledge with regard to the real objects is mixed up or confused 
with all kinds of mental images and it is not possible for us to 
separate the pure knowledge from these mental images by 
ordinary proceeses of mental analysis or reasoning. The only 
way in which this can be done is by performing Samyama on the 
object and fusing the mind with it as explained in 1-41. The pure, 
real, internal knowedge regarding the object is isolated from the 
mixed external knowledge and the Yogi can then know the real 
object by making the mind one with it. 

It is obvious that there must be two stages in this process of 
' knowing by fusing '. In the first stage the heterogeneous knowl- 
edge regarding the object must be separated into its different con- 
stituents. In this stage all the constituents of the knowledge, 
internal and external, are present but from an undifferentiated and 
confused state they are resolved more and more into a state of 
clearly-defined and differentiated constituents. In the second 
stage the mind is fused with the pure knowledge which has been 
isolated in the first stage. In this process of selective fusion, 
naturally, all the other constituents which' depend upon memory 
drop out automatically and the mind shines only with the pure 
knowledge of the object, nothing else. 1-42 deals with the first 
stage and 1-43 with the second stage. 

Let us now consider the significance of the words used in 
1-42 to indicate this resolution and differentiation of this composite 
knowledge with regard to the object into its clearly defined 
constituents. The word Tatra refers to the state of Samadhi des- 
cribed in the previous Sutra and is obviously used to point out 
that this process of resolution is carried out in a state of Samadhi 
and cannot be accomplished by an ordinary process of mental 
analysis. It is only when the mind has been completely isolated 
from external influences and has reached the concentrated state 
of Dkyana that it can successfully tackle this problem of resolution. 
Sabda-Artka-Jnana define the three categories of knowledge which 
are inextricably mixed up in the mind of the ordinary man 
and can be resolved only in Savitarka-Samadhi. Sabia refers to 



108 



SECTION I (42) 



SAMAJDHI PADA 



109 



knowledge which is based only on words and is not connected in 
any way with the object which is being considered. Much of 
our thinking is of this superficial nature, based merely on words 
and not touching the object at all. Artha refers to the true 
knowledge about the object or its real meaning which the Togi 
wants. And Jndna refers to the ordinary knowledge based on the 
perception of the sense-organs and the reasoning of the mind. The 
condition of not being able to distinguish clearly between these 
three kinds of knowledge with the result that the mind hovers 
between them is sought to be conveyed by the word Vikalpaili. 
This is inevitable as long as the three kinds of knowledge have not 
separated out, as it were, in three separate layers but are present 
in a state of mixture or con-fusion which is indicated by the word 
Samkirnd. It will perhaps help the student to understand this 
progressive resolution of the three kinds of knowledge if we 
illustrate the process diagrammatically as follows : 



ARTHA 




SAB DA [ ]aRTHA( J JNANA 
(6) 



(sABDA J ( ARTHA J ( JNANA j 



Fig. 6 



It will be seen that while in the first step knowledge based on 
Sabda only covers the other two, the progressive resolution results 
in the last step in the complete separation of the three. Students 
of Science will also find the analogy of an emulsion helpful in 
understanding this progressive resolution and separation into two 
separate and distinct constituents. If two immiscible liquids are 
shaken together vigorously it is possible to prepare an emulsion in 
which both appear to be present in a homogeneous condition 
though they really remain separate. But if the emulsion is allowed 
to stand for sometime the two liquids will gradually separate out 
into two separate layers. This analogy is especially apt because 
it is the absence of agitation which leads to the separation of the 
two layers just as in Savitarka Samddhi it is really the extreme 
tranquillization of the mind which brings about the separation of 
the different kinds of knowledge. 

When the different mental components have separated and 
are seen in their correct relationship then there can be no confusion 
or going from one to the other. It is because they are mistaken 
for one another and the proper province of each is not defined 
that there is confusion and consequent Vitarka (see also in this 
connection 1 11-17). When the mental picture clears up and each 
component is seen in true perspective Vitarka must come to an end. 

Smrti-parisuddhau svarupa-su.nyeva.rtha- 
ma.tra-nirbha.sa nirvitarka. 

*Hfd (of) memory lfT9R»t on clarification *=He>H own form; 
essential nature; self-awareness 9F=3" devoid (of) ^ as if 3T*T- 
object; real meaning; true knowledge of the object *1W- only 
Pl'HUn presenting; shining (with); appearing (as) fafad+T a state 
of Samddhi characterized by absence of Vitarka. 

43. On the clarification of memory, when the 
mind loses its essential nature (subjectivity) , as it were, 



no 



SECTION I (43) 



and the real knowledge of the object alone shines 
(through the mind) Nirvitarka Samadhi is attained. 

The Savitarka stage of Samadhi whi6h has been dealt with in 
the previous Sutra prepares the ground for the Nirvitarka stage. 
The confused state of the mind in which different kinds of knowl- 
edge were mixed up has been gradually replaced by a clarified 
state in which the three kinds of knowledge are seen separate 
and clearly distinguishable. This clarification is called Smrtt- 
pariiuddhi in the present Sutra. Why is this resolution of knowl- 
edge present in the mind of the Yogi called ' clearing up of 
memory ' ? To understand the reason for the use of the word 
Smrti in this connection the student should recall 1-6 in which 
thi Vrttis or modifications of the mind are classified under five 
heads and Smrti or "memory is one of these. If he has understood 
the basis of this classification he will see at once that the modifi- 
cation of the mind in Savitarka Samadhi comes under Smrti or 
memory. As the Yogi's mind is cut off completely from the 
external world, the modification cannot come under ' right knowl- 
edge ' or 'wrong knowledge'. As he is not asleep but fully 
conscious it cannot come under ' sleep '. As he is performing 
Samyama not on any imaginary thing but on a definite thing of 
which the reality is to be known, the modification cannot come 
under * imagination '. The modification is really of the nature of 
memory because it is a reproduction in the mind of a thing which 
has been experienced before. That is why Patafijali calls the 
process of clearing up as ' clarification of memory '. 

When the memory has become clarified the mind is ready for 
the next step, viz. reducing the self-awareness to the utmost limit. 
This mental process which is called Svarupa-Sunya has been explain- 
ed in dealing with III-3 and it is not necessary to go into this 
question here, but two facts may be pointed out in this connection. 
The first point we should note is that the dissolution of the mental 
self-awareness can come only after the resolution of the composite 
and complex knowledge with regard to the object into its three 
clearly denned constituents. This is clear from the word Pari- 
htddhau which means * on the clearing up of. The second point 



SAMADHI PADA 



111 



to which attention may be drawn is the significance of the word 
Jva after Sunya. The word Iva means 'as if and it is used to 
signify that though the mind seems to disappear it is still there. 
The very fact that the ' object ' is ' shining ' in it points to the 
presence of the mind. It is only its subjective nature which has 
disappeared in the object, as it were, thus bringing about a fusion 
of the subjective and objective which is necessary for attaining the 
Samadhi state. It is this fusion which brings about the disappear- 
ance of the other two constituents Sab da and Jndna leaving the 
pure knowledge or Svarupa of the object alone to fill the mind. 
The object is then seen in its naked reality. The use of the word 
Nirbhdsa which means ' shining ' for describing the filling of the 
mind with the Svarupa or real knowledge of the ' object ' follows 
naturally from the simile used in 1-41 for illustrating the fusion of 
subjective and objective. The mind though itself imperceptible 
like the transparent jewel yet shines with the light of true knowl- 
edge of the object. The use of the word Nirvitarka for a state of 
Samadhi in which there is no Vitarka also requires some explanation. 
One can understand the use of the word Savitarka in the previous 
Sutra because the state of Samadhi is accompanied by Vitarka. But 
why use the word Nirvitarka for a state in which there is no 
Vitarka ? Simply to indicate the nature of the state which has 
gone before. When one says that his mind is unburdened, it 
means not only that there is no burden on it now but also that it 
was burdened before. The use of the word Nirvitarka in this 
Sutra means, therefore, that the state indicated is arrived at after 
passing through the Savitarka state and is merely the consummation 
or culmination of the previous state. The consciousness is still 
functioning at the same level and in the same vehicle though it 
has reached the utmost limit as far as knowledge with regard to 
that object on that plane is concerned. Any further change in 
this state can only be a repetition of itself as explained in con- 
nection with 111-12. It is only by the practice of Nirodha that 
consciousness can pass on into the next vehicle and a new series 
of changes at a higher level can begin. 

An interesting question that may arise in the mind of the 
student is: Who brings about the fusion of subjective and objective 
and also the further transformations which take place in the 



112 



SECTION I (43, 44) 



further stages of Samadhi? Upto the point where Vitarka is present 
the transformations may be supposed to take place through the 
agency of the subjective mind which is still active. But who pro- 
vides the guiding and propelling force after the subjective mind 
has merged in the object? Obviously, the Purusa who is present 
all the time in the background and who is the lord of the mind as 
pointed out in IV-18. The mind itself is inert and it is the con- 
stant presence of the Purusa in the background which endows it 
not only with the capacity to perceive but also the will to change. 
The mind is always an instrument. The real Dram and the Kdrta 
is the Purusa always. So when the lower mind merges with the 
object in jfirvitarka Samadhi it is the Purusa working in his higher 
principles who really is in charge and is ultimately responsible for 
the continuous and delicate transformations which take place in 
the further stages of Samadhi. In fact, throughout the continuous 
unfoldment which takes place in Toga upto the point of attaining 
Kaivalya, it is the Purusa who has to be considered as guiding the 
evolution. Tt is true that this view is not in conformity with the 
conceptions of Samkhya philosophy in which the Purusa is con- 
sidered to be a mere Drasta, spectator, but Yogic technique, as 
pointed out elsewhere, is not based solely on Samkhya and without 
assuming a guiding role for the Purusa this technique would be 
unintelligible. This is not the place, however, to enter into this 
philosophical question. 

Etayaiva savicara nirvicara ca suksmavisaya 
vyakhyata. 
it^t by this ^ even; alone; itself aPWKI Samadhi involving 
Vicara or reflection (see 1-17 and 11-19) f^WTT Samadhi not in- 
volving Vicara ^ and ^rf^TT Samadhi involving (still more) 
subtle ' objects ' °4Hs4KU described or explained. 

44. By this (what has been said in the two pre- 
vious Sutras) Samadhis of Savicara, Nirvicara and subtler 
stages (1-17) have also been explained. 



SAMADHI PADA 



113 



The difficulty of comprehending Samadhi even in the lowest 
Sauitarka-Nirvitarka stage, in spite of the fact that we are living in a 
world of names and forms and are familiar to some extent with 
the working of the concrete mind, should make it easy to under- 
stand why Patanjali has not dealt with the higher stages of Samadhi 
in detail and has disposed of the whole subject in two Sutras. 1-44 
merely points out that the mental processes in Savicara-Jfirvicdra 
and other higher stages of Samadhi are analogous to those of 
Savitarka-Jfirvitarka Samadhi, i.e. the Samadhi in relation to Suksma- 
visayas or subtle objects, begins with Samyama on the outermost 
aspect of the object which is the most complex and ending with the 
isolation of the object in its real state which is the simplest. It 
may be mentioned here that the progressive involution of consci- 
ousness in matter is generally accompanied by the increasing 
complexity of the functions and the reverse process of release of 
consciousness from the limitations of matter means simplification 
of functions. An example will serve to throw some light on this 
general principle. The process of perceiving an external world 
requires the agency of sense-organs on the physical plane, there 
being a separate sense-organ for contacting each Bhuta. But 
oh the higher spiritual planes perception takes place through 
a single faculty which is called Pratibha and which performs 
the functions of all the five sense-organs in an integrated 
manner. 

A clear grasp of this fundamental principle will help the student 
in understanding the role of Samadhi in this process of unveiling the 
subtler and more profound aspects of objects in the manifested 
Universe. Samadhi does nothing more than reverse this involution 
of consciousness and this evolution or unfoldment of consciousness 
automatically reveals the subtler aspects of these objects. What 
the Yogi really does is to sink deeper and deeper into his own 
consciousness. This brings into action the more comprehensive 
faculties of the increasingly subtler planes which alone can reveal 
the subtler aspects of objects. What the intellect may strain to 
the utmost to understand without much success becomes self- 
evident in the light of these higher faculties. That is why 
Patanjali has not tried to deal with matters which are really beyond 
the comprehension of the brain-bound intellect. 
8 



114 SECTION I (45,46) 

Suksma-visayatvam calinga-pary- 
avasanam. 

fflRft^* the state of Samadhi concerned with subtle objects 
* andV- the last stage of the Gunas (IMS), ^^^ extend- 
ing (up to). 

45 The province of Samadhi concerned with 
subtle objects extends upto the Alinga stage of the Gunas. 

If different objects are subtle to different degrees how can 
these deg^es of subtlety be classified? The different degrees of 
subltycan be classified in the most <^^^£^ 
««Wmne them to the planes on wluch they exist. But for reasons 
whfch hate been pointed out in dealing with I -17 Patanjah has 
TdoPted a functional and not a structural basis for classifying 
phenomena and so the degrees of subtlety have **£5j£ 
Lcording to the stages of the Gunas given in 11-19. As the subject 
S been dealt with thoroughly in that context it is not necessary 
Tdiscusstt here. It may, however, be pointed out that according 
to SaZlya all objects are the result of different combinations 
of SaVand so the classification of objects in four categories 
according to the four stages of the Gunas is perfectly logic*. The 
fast stage of the Gunas is called Alinga and so naturally the limit 
of subtlety corresponds with the Alinga stage. 

YV <TT ^ *$&■ STfTTfsr: 

Ta eva sabyah samadhih. 
^rr: those rn, only ^: with < seed '; having an object; 
objective ^PTTfa: Samadhi. 

46. They (stages corresponding to subtle objects) 
constitute only Samadhi with ' seed '. 



SAMADHI PADA 



115 



All objects within the realm of Prakrti upon which Samyama 
may be performed to discover their relative reality have been 
summed up in 1-45. Samadhi which deals with any of these objects 
is called Sabija Samadhi for reasons explained in connection with 
1-42. An object on which Samyama is performed is technically 
called a ' seed ' whether it is gross or subtle. So Sabija Samadhi may 
also be called objective Samadhi as opposed to Nirbija Samadhi 
or subjective Samadhi in which there is no ' object ' or ' seed ' of 
meditation. The Seeker Himself is the object of His search. The 
Seer who has gained the capacity to see truly all objects within 
the realm of Prakrti now wants to see Himself as He really is. 

What distinguishes Sabija Samadhi from Nirbija Samadhi is 
therefore the presence of an object associated with Prakrti whose 
relative reality has to be realized. In Nirbija Samadhi, Purusa who 
is beyond the realm of Prakrti is the ' objectless ' objective. He is 
the Seeker as well as the object of the search. In Sabija Samadhi 
also he is really seeking Himself but a veil, howsoever thin, still 
obscures his vision. In Nirbija Samadhi He attempts to tear off the 
last veil in order to obtain a completely unobstructed vision of 
Himself. This is what is meant by Self-Realization. 



Nirvicara-vaisaradye 'dhyatma-prasadah. 

fnf^-m < Samadhi (of) the Nirvicara stage =)!JIK^ on the refine- 
ment; on attaining the utmost purity 3|SAJk*j spiritual H^K: 
lucidity, clarity. 

47. On attaining the utmost purity of the Nirvi- 
cara stage (of Samadhi) there is the dawning of the 
spiritual light. 

1-47 is meant to draw a distinction between the lower and 
higher stages of Samadhi and to emphasize that spirituality is not 
necessarily associated with all the stages. We have seen already 
that Sabija Samadhi begins on the plane of the lower mind and its 



116 



SECTION I (47) 



province extends upto the Atmic plane. At which point in these 
successive stages of Samddhi does the light of spirituality begin to 
dawn in consciousness? To be able to answer this question we 
should recall that the intellect is the separative and constrictive 
principle in man which distorts his vision and is responsible for 
the common illusions of the lower life. As long as consciousness 
is functioning within the realms of the intellect alone it must remain 
bound by those illusions. Samddhi in the realm of the intellect, 
while it reveals the lower aspect of the reality which is hidden 
behind the objects on which Samyama is performed, does not 
necessarily bring with it perception of the higher truths of a 
spiritual nature, does not for instance give a vision of the funda- 
mental unity of life. It is conceivable, for example, that a scientist 
may discover many of the truths underlying the physical world by 
means of Samddhi and yet remain absolutely unaware of the deeper 
spiritual truths which are associated with spirituality. Some of 
the lower Siddhis such as those dealt with in III-28t32 can be 
obtained in this manner. In fact the black magicians who are 
called Brothers of the Shadow, are all Yogis who are proficient in 
the technique of lower Toga and undoubtedly possess many of the 
lower Siddhis. But their work is confined within the realm of the 
intellect and they remain ignorant of the higher truths of existence. 
Their selfish outlook and evil ways debar them from entering into 
the deeper and spiritual realms of consciousness and thus acquiring 
true wisdom and spiritual illumination. 

This Sutra points out that spiritual illumination begins to 
flood the mind when the Yogi has reached the last stage of 
Jfirvicdra Samddhi and is in the borderland which separates the 
intellect from the next higher spiritual principle, Buddhi or Intui- 
tion. In this stage the light of Buddhi which is the source of 
wisdom and spirituality begins to shed its radiance on the 
intellect. Illuminated in this manner the intellect ceases to be a 
slave of the lower self and becomes a willing instrument of the 
Higher Self working through Atmd-Buddhi-Manas. For, the distor- 
tions and illusions associated with the intellect are not really 
inherent in this principle. They are due to the absence of 
spiritual illumination. An intellect illuminated by the light of 
Buddhi and under the control of the Atmd is a magnificent 



SAMADHI PADA 



117 



and powerful instrument which even the Adepts use constantly in 
Their work. 



Rtambhara tatra prajna. 

iot *■»!<. i Truth-bearing;- Right-bearing <RT there S^TT higher 
state of consciousness (experienced in Samddhi). 

48. There, the consciousness is Truth- and Right- 
bearing. 

In the previous Sutra the stage at which the purely intellectual 
consciousness is converted into spiritual consciousness in Samddhi 
was pointed out. The present Sutra gives an important attribute 
of the new type of consciousness which emerges as a result of this 
change. This is called Rtambhara. This word is derived from 
two Samskrta roots Rtam which means ' the Right ' and Bhara which 
means ' to bear ' or ' to hold'. Rtambhara therefore literally means 
Right-bearing. Rtam and Satyam (the True) are two^ words of 
very profound significance in the scripture of the Hindus and being 
correlatives are generally used together. Although they are some- 
times used synonymously there is a subtle distinction in their 
meaning which many people find it difficult to grasp. To under- 
stand this we should recall the well-known doctrine of Eastern 
philosophy according to which the Universe, both seen and unseen, 
is a manifestation of a Divine Reality or Spirit which abides 
within it and is the ultimate cause and source of all that takes 
place in it in terms of time and space. That Reality is referred 
to as Sat and Its existence in the Universe manifests in two funda- 
mental ways. In the first place, It constitutes the truth or the 
very essence of all things. This is called Satyam. In the second 
place, It determines the ordered course of things both in their 
material and moral aspect. This is called Rtam. Satyam is thus 
the relative truth underlying manifestation constituting the 
realities of all things. Rtam is the cosmic order including all laws — 
natural, moral or spiritual — in their totality which are eternal and 



118 



SECTION I (48) 



inviolable in tteir nature. Satyam and Rtam will therefore be seen 
to be two aspects of Sat in manifestation, one static the other 
dynamic. They are inseparable and together constitute the very 
foundation of the manifested Universe. Rtambhard Prajnd is thus 
that kind of consciousness which gives an unerring perception of 
the Right and the True underlying manifestation. Whatever is 
perceived in the light of this Prajnd must be Right and True. 

In dealing with the previous Sutra the distorting influence of 
the intellect was referred to and we saw how the intellect, without 
the illumination of Buddhi is incapable of perceiving the deeper 
truths of life. Let us consider briefly how this obscmation which 
is brought about by the intellect works. In our search for knowl- 
edge we want the truth as a whole but the intellect allows us to 
see only a part of the truth at a time. So the knowledge derived 
through the intellect is never perfect, can by its very nature be 
never perfect. The manner in which our intellect brings about 
this fragmentation of truth and prevents us from seeing things as 
they are is realized only when we transcend the intellect in 
Samddhi and penetrate into the deeper realms of consciousness 
lying beyond the intellect. Not only is nothing seen as a whole by 
the intellect, but nothing is seen in its correct perspective in its 
relation to other things and other truths which exist at the same 
time. This results in exaggerating the importance of partial 
truths, misusing knowledge concerning natural forces, adopting 
wrong means to gain right ends and so many other evils of which 
the modern civilization based on intellect provides so many and 
such glaring instances. This lack of wholeness and lack of perspec- 
tive must characterize all knowledge and action based on intellect 
divorced from wisdom. 

The knowledge obtained in Samddhi when the light of Buddhi 
illuminates the mind is not only free from error and doubt but 
also related to the underlying Cosmic Law which governs mani- 
festation. It is based not only on Truth but also on Right. That 
is why the Prajnd or consciousness functioning in these higher 
stages of Samddhi is called Rlambhard. The knowledge which the 
Togi gets is not only perfectly true but he is incapable of misusing 
that knowledge, as knowledge obtained through the intellect alone 
can be misused. Life and action based on such knowledge must 



SAMADHI PADA 



119 



be righteous, and in accordance with the Great Law which 
governs the whole Universe. 

Y£. 'NdMHH^I^i^rclNAII ftwfe^f I 

Srutanumana-prajnabhyam anya-visaya 
visesarthatvat. 

^T heard ; (based on) revelation or testimony 3H*JH (based 
on) inference -SRmRrrq; from (these) two (levels of) higher con- 
sciousness apqf^nTT having another object or content fW9rWT^W 
because of having a particular object. 

49. The knowledge based on inference or testi- 
mony is different from direct knowledge obtained in 
the higher states of consciousness (1-48) because it is 
confined to a particular object (or aspect). 

In the previous Sutra one prominent characteristic of the new 
consciousness which dawns on the refinement of .Virvicdra Samddhi 
was pointed out. This Sutra clarifies still further the distinction 
between intellectual and intuitive knowledge. As was pointed 
out in 1-7, there are three sources of right knowledge — direct 
cognition, inference and testimony. All these three are available 
in the realm of the intellect. Direct cognition, however, plays a 
very limited part in this realm because it is confined to the 
unreliable reports received through the sense-organs. These 
reports by themselves do not give us right knowledge and have to 
be constantly checked and corrected by the other two methods 
mentioned above. We see the Sun rising in the East every morning, 
moving across the sky and sinking in the West but by inference 
we know that this is a mere illusion and the Sun appears to move on 
account of the rotation of the earth on its axis. In the same way 
the familiar world of forms, colours etc. which we cognize with 
our sense-organs has no real existence. It is all a play of electrons, 
atoms, molecules and various kinds of energies which Science has 



120 



SECTION I (49) 



discovered. We hardly realize what an important part inference 
and testimony play in our life until we try to analyse our ordinary 
knowledge and the means of obtaining it. These two instruments 
of obtaining and correcting knowledge are peculiarly intellectual 
and are not necessary in the higher realms of the mind which 
transcend the intellect. A person who is obliged to discover 
objects in a room which is utterly dark is obliged to feel them 
carefully but he does not need to adopt this crude method of 
discovery and investigation if he is able to get a light. He can 
see them directly. Knowledge on the spiritual planes beyond the 
intellect is based neither on inference nor on testimony but only 
on direct cognition. But this direct cognition, unlike the direct 
cognition through the sense-organs, is hot subject to error and 
does not require correction by means of inference and testimony. 

What does the phrase Visesdrthatvdl mean ? Literally, it means 
' because of having a particular object '. It has been pointed out 
already that the intellect is capable of grasping only one thing at 
a time, either one object or one aspect of an object. It is this 
fragmentation of knowledge, this inability to see things in the 
background of the whole which is the greatest limitation of 
intellectual perception and intuitive perception is free from this 
limitation. In the higher realms of consciousness each object is 
seen not in isolation but as part of a whole in which all truths, laws 
and principles have their due place. The intellect is like a telescope 
which can be directed only on a particular star and can see it in 
isolation from other stars. Intuitive consciousness is like the eye 
which can see the whole heavens simultaneously and in true 
perspective. The analogy is no doubt crude but it may help the 
student to grasp the difference between the two types of con- 
sciousness. 

The need for taking the help of inference and testimony arises 
because of the insufficiency of knowledge and this insufficiency is 
due to the absence of the whole in the background. It is true that 
intuitive knowledge may not be perfect and may lack the precision 
and detail of intellectual knowledge but as far as it goes it is free 
from the possibility of error and distortion. A dim light in a big 
room may not give a clear picture of its contents but it enables 
things to be seen in their proper proportion and perspective. As 



SAMADHI PADA 



121 



the light becomes stronger all things are seen more clearly but in 
the same proportion and perspective. On the other hand a man 
who is groping in the dark, feeling one object after another, may 
get an entirely wrong idea with regard to any object and will 
have to revise his uncertain conclusions constantly and sometimes 
drastically. 

%°. cT^r: *r+ 1 vaj *i*+ 1 <n Oh rgft i 



Taj-jah 
bandhi. 



samskaro 'nya-samskara-prati- 



^T^JT: (SRT+sr:) born of it y'H>K: impression W% (of) other 
«'«>K impressions TT^r^rEft preventer; that which stands in the 
way of. 

50. The impression produced by it {Sabija 
Samadhi) stands in the way of other impressions. 

In Sabija Samadhi the Cilia is always moulded upon a partic- 
ular pattern, this pattern being determined by the ' seed ' which 
is the object of Samyama. The control of the will over the mind 
is so complete that it is impossible for any external distraction to 
produce the slightest alternation in the impression created by the 
object. The nature of the object will be different according to 
the stage of Samadhi but an object must always be there and this 
prevents other ideas from taking possession of the mind. Even in 
ordinary life we find that if the mind is busy in thinking deeply 
along a particular line it is more difficult for any distracting idea 
to get into it, the deeper the concentration the greater the diffi- 
culty of any such idea gaining entrance into the mind. But the 
moment_the mind ceases to function under the control of the will 
and is in a relaxed condition all kinds of ideas which were kept in 
abeyance in the sub-conscious mind begin to appear in the con- 
scious mind. Something similar, though at a much deeper level, 
would take place if the impression created by the ' seed ' in 
Samprajnata Samadhi is removed before the capacity to keep the 



122 



SECTION I (50, 51) 



mind equally alert and concentrated in the condition of void is 
acquired. The sudden entry of all kinds of ideas in an uncon- 
trolled manner on account of the vacuum which would be pro- 
duced may lead to all kinds of serious complications. 

It will be seen therefore that Samprajnata Samddhi is not only a 
means of acquiring knowledge and power in the different realms 
of Prakrti but also for gaining the final objective of Self-realization. 
For, it is only after sufficient practice of Samprajnata Samddhi that 
the corresponding Asamprajndta Samadlii can be practised and it is 
only after sufficient practice of Sabija Samddhi in the four stages 
that Nirbija Samddhi can be practised. This should serve to remove 
the misconception common among a certain class of over-enthusi- 
astic aspirants that it is possible to dive directly into the realms of 
Reality without going through long and tedious mental discipline 
and acquiring the capacity to perform Samyama on any object. 
This will also explain why spiritual teachers generally prescribe 
Saguna Updsana and discourage aspirants from taking to Nirguna 
Updsana in the early stages. The problem of spiritual life and 
Self-realization would be all too easy if aspirants had only to sit 
down and make their minds empty in the ordinary way! 

%<\. cTwrfr farts* *HfaOwifa«iT>»i: *nrrfsr: i 

Tasyapi nirodhe sarva-nirodhan nirbijah 
samadhih. 

^IW of that SfpTalso Pl<|ET on suppression; inhibition ^ (of ) 
all PiOsiiq by suppression fH«fl^l: ' Seedless '; subjective ?PTTfjJ: 
Samddhi. . 

51. On suppression of even that owing to sup- 
pression of all (modifications of the mind) ' Seedless ' 
Samddhi (is attained). 

When the capacity to perform Samyama has been acquired 
and the Yogi can pass easily into the last stage of Sabija Samddhi 
corresponding to the Asmita stage of Samprajnata Samddhi (1-17) 



samAdhi pada 



123 



and the Alinga stage of the Gunas (11-19) he is ready for taking the 
last step, namely, transcending the realm of Prakrti altogether and 
attaining Self-realization. In the Asmita stage consciousness is 
functioning in the subtlest form of Citta and enlightenment has 
reached the highest degree, but since consciousness is still in the 
realm of Prakrti it must be limited to some extent. The veils of 
illusion have been removed one after another but there is still 
present one last, almost imperceptible veil which prevents complete 
Self-realization and the object of Nirbija Samddhi is to remove this. 
In the earlier stages of Samprajnata Samddhi the dropping of the 
' seed ' leads to the emergence of consciousness into the next 
subtler plane but after the Asmita stage has been reached and the 
consciousness is centred on the Atmic plane the dropping of the 
' seed ' will lead the emergence of consciousness into the plane 
of Purusa himself. The Light which was upto this stage illumi- 
nating other objects now illuminates Itself, for it has withdrawn 
beyond the realm of these objects. The Seer is now established in 
his own Self (1-3). 

It is impossible to imagine this state in which the light of 
consciousness illuminates itself instead of illuminating other objects 
outside itself but the student, at least, should not make the mistake 
of imagining it as a state in which the Yogi finds himself immersed 
in a sea of nebulous bliss and knowledge. Each successive stage 
of unfoldment of consciousness increases tremendously its vividness 
and clarity and brings about an added influx of knowledge and 
power. It is absurd to suppose therefore that in the last stage 
which marks the climax of this unfoldment consciousness lapses 
suddenly into a vague and nebulous state. It is only the limi- 
tations of the vehicles through which we try to visualise this state 
which prevent us from comprehending it even to a limited extent. 
When the vibrations of sound become too rapid they appear 
as silence. When the vibrations of light become too fine they 
appear as darkness. In the same way the extremely subtle nature 
of this transcendent consciousness of Reality appears as a void 
to the mind. 

The explanation given above should enable the student to 
understand clearly the relation between Nirbija Samddhi and Asam- 
prajndta Samddhi. It will be seen that Nirbija Samddhi is nothing 



124 



SECTION I (51) 



but the last stage of Asatnprajndta Samddhi. It differs from the 
previous Asamprajnata Samddhis in that there is no deeper level of 
Gitta into which consciousness can withdraw. Any further with- 
drawal now must be into the consciousness of the Purusa himself. 
The consciousness of the Yogi is, as it were, poised on the brink of 
the manifested Universe and has to plunge from the last foothold 
in the realm of Prakrti into the Ocean of Reality. The Yogi is 
like a swimmer standing on a high cliff abutting the sea. He 
jumps down from one ledge to another and then comes to the 
lowest level from which he has to plunge directly into the se'a. 
The last jump is different from all the preceding jumps in that he 
passes into an entirely different kind of medium. 

Niroija Samddhi is so called not only because there is no ' seed ' 
in the field of consciousness but also because in this kind of 
Samddhi no new Samskdra is created. One characteristic of a 
' seed ', namely its complex and multi-layer nature, has already 
been referred to in 1-42 and provides the reason for calling the 
object ofSamyama in Samddhi a 'seed '. But another characteristic 
of a seed is that it reproduces itself when sown in the ground. 
This potentiality to reproduce themselves under favourable condi- 
tions is also present in the ' seeds ' of Samprajfidta Samddhi. In 
Nirbija Samddhi, there being no ' seed ' no Samskaras can be pro- 
duced. Not only no fresh Samskaras can be produced but the old 
Samskaras of Sabija Samddhi are gradually dissipated by Para-Vairagya 
and partial contact with the Purusa (IV-29). The consciousness 
thus gradually becomes free to function unburdened by the kind 
of Samskaras which tend to draw it back into the realm of Prakrti. 
Nirbija Samddhi is therefore not only a means of passing out of the 
realm of Prakrti but also of exhausting the subtle Samskaras which 
still remain and which must be destroyed completely before 
Kaivalya can be attained. 



SECTION II 

SADHANA PADA 



SADHANA PAD A 



Tapah-svadhyayesvara-pranidhanani 
kriya-yogah. 

^TT: asceticism; austerity *c||£4m self study; study which leads 
to the knowledge of the Self through Japa ^JMOlfuifclMlPi (and) self- 
surrender, or resignation to God f^srnrtT: preliminary (practical) 
Toga. 

1. Austerity, self-study and resignation to Isvara 
constitute preliminary Toga. 

The last three of the five elements of Niyama enumerated in 
11-32 have been placed in the above Sutra under the title of 
Kriya-Toga. This is rather an unusual procedure and we should 
try to grasp the significance of this repetition in a book which 
attempts to condense knowledge to the utmost limit. Obviously, 
the reason why Tapas, Svadhyaya and Isvara-pranidhana are mention- 
ed in two different contexts lies in the fact that they serve two 
different purposes. And since the development of the subject of 
self-culture in Section II of the Toga-Sutras is. progressive in char- 
acter it follows that the purpose of these three elements in II-l is 
of a more preliminary nature than that in 11-32. Their purpose 
in 11-32 is the same as that of the other elements of Niyama and 
has been discussed at the proper place. What is the purpose in 
the context of II-l ? Let us see. 

Anyone who is familiar with the goal of Togic life and the 
kind of effort it involves for its attainment will realize that it is 
neither possible nor advisable for anybody who is absorbed in the 



128 



SECTION II (1) 



life of the world and completely under the influence of Klesas to 
plunge all at once into the regular practice of Toga. If he is 
sufficiently interested in the Togic philosophy and wants to enter 
the path which leads to its goal he should first accustom himself to 
discipline, should acquire the necessary knowledge of the Dharma- 
Sastras and especially of the Yoga-Sastras and should reduce the 
intensity of his egoism and all the other Klefas which are derived 
from it. The difference between the outlook and the life of the 
ordinary worldly man and the life which the Yogi is required to 
live is so great that a sudden change from the one to the other is 
not possible and if attempted may produce a violent reaction in 
the mind of the aspirant, throwing him back with still greater 
force into the life of the world. A preparatory period of self- 
training in which he gradually assimilates the Yogic philosophy 
and its technique and accustoms himself to self-discipline makes 
the transition from the one life to the other easier and safer. It 
also incidentally enables the mere student to find out whether he 
is sufficiently keen to adopt the Yogic life and make a serious 
attempt to realize the Yogic ideal. There are too many cases of 
enthusiastic aspirants who for no apparent reason cool off, or 
finding the Yogic discipline too irksome, give it up. They are not 
yet ready for the Yogic life. 

Even where there is present the required earnestness and the 
determination to tread the path of Yoga it is necessary to establish 
a permanent mood and habit of pursuing its ideal. Mere wishing 
or willing is not enough. All the mental powers and desires of 
the Sadhaka should be polarized and aligned with the Yogic 
ideal. Many aspirants have very confused and sometimes totally 
wrong ideas with regard to the object and technique of Yoga. 
Many of them have very exaggerated notions with regard to their 
earnestness and capacity to tread the path of Yoga. Their ideas 
become clarified and their capacity and earnestness are tested 
severely in trying to practise Kriya-Yoga. They either emerge 
from the preliminary self-discipline with a clearly defined aim and 
a determination and capacity to pursue it to the end with vigour 
and single-minded devotion, or they gradually realize that they 
are not yet ready for the practice of Yoga and decide to tune their 
aspiration to the lower key of mere intellectual study. 



SADHANA PADA 



129 



This preparatory self-discipline is triple in its nature corres- 
ponding to the triple nature of a human being. Tapas is related 
to his will, Svddhydya to the intellect and Isvara-pranidhdna to the 
emotions. This discipline, therefore, tests and develops all the 
three aspects of his nature and produces an all-round and 
balanced growth of the individuality which is so essential for the 
attainment of any high ideal. This point will become clear when 
we consider the significance of these three elements of Kriya-Yoga 
in dealing with 11-32. 

There exists some confusion with regard to the meaning of 
the Samskrta word Kriyd, some commentators preferring to translate . 
it as ' preliminary ', others as ' practical '. As a matter of fact 
Kriya-Yoga is both practical and preliminary. It is preliminary 
because it has to be taken up in the initial stages of the practice 
of Yoga and it is practical because it puts to a practical test the 
aspirations and earnestness of the Sadhaka and develops in him the 
capacity to begin the practice of Yoga as distinguished from its 
mere theoretical study however deep this might be. 

Sarnadhi-bhavanarthah kleSa-tanukara- 
narthas* ca. 

Wnfe trance %U<4*1I<4: for bringing about ^ST afflictions *TT- 
<fr<u|HJ : for Tcducing; for making attenuated ^ and. 

2. {Kriya-Yoga) is practised for attenuating Kief as 
and bringing about Samadhi. 

Although the practice of the three elements of Kriya-Yoga is 
supposed to subserve the preparatory training of the aspirant 
it should not therefore be assumed that they are of secondary 
importance and have only a limited use in the life of the Sadhaka. 
How effective this training is and to what exalted stage of develop- 
ment it is capable of leading the aspirant will be seen from the 
second Sutra which we are considering and which gives the results 
9 



130 



section n (2, 3) 



SADHANA PADA 



131 



of practising Kriya-^°S a - KriyS- Yoga not only attenuates the Klesas 
and thus lays the foundation f the Yogic life but it also leads 
the aspirant to Samadhi, the essential and final technique of Yoga. 
It is therefore, also capable of building to a great extent the 
superstructure of the Yogic life. The importance of Kriya-Yoga 
and the high stage of devel p men t to which it can lead the 
Sadhaka will be clear when we h ave considered the ultimate results 
of practising fapas, Svadhyaya a nd Isvara-pranidhana in 11-43-45. 

The ultimate stage of Samadhi is, of course, reached through 
the practice of Isvara-pranidhana as indicated in 1-23 and 11-45. 
Although the two r esult ^ of Practising Kriya-Yoga enumerated in 
II-2 are related to the initial and ultimate stages of Yogic practice 
they are really very closely connected and in a sense comple- 
mentary. The more the Klesas are attenuated the greater becomes 
the capacity of the Sadhaka to practise Samadhi and the nearer he 
draws to his goal of Kaivalya. When the Klesas have been reduced 
to the vanishing point he is in habitual Samadhi (Sahaja-Samddhi) , 
at the threshold of Kaivalya. 

We shall take up trie discussion of these three elements of . 
Kriya-Yoga as part of Ncyama in H. 32 . 

Avidyasmita-raga-dvesabhinivesah klesah 

ajfag rr ignorance; lack of awareness; illusion ajR-Hdl 'I-am- 
ness' egoism; ^ attraction; Hki n g gq- repulsion; dislike -3rf?T- 
ft^nr: (and) clinging (to life); f car f death ^U: pains; afflic- 
tions;' miseries; causes of pain. 

3. The lack of awareness of Reality, the sense of 
egoism or ' I-am-ness , attractions and repulsions to- 
wards objects and the strong desire for life are the great 
afflictions or causes of all miseries in life. 

The phu° so P n y ol Klesas i s rea i] v the foundation of the system 
of Yoga outlined by Patanjah. j t j s nec essary to understand this 



philosophy thoroughly because it provides a satisfactory answer to 
the initial and pertinent question, ' Why should we practise 
Yoga? ' The philosophy of Klesas is not peculiar to this system of 
Yoga. In its essential ideas it forms the substratum of all schools 
of Yoga in India though perhaps it has not been expounded as 
clearly and systematically as in the Samkhya and Yoga Darsanas. 

Many Western scholars have not fully understood the real 
significance of the philosophy of Klesas and tend to regard it 
merely as an expression of the pessimism which they think 
characterizes Hindu philosophical thought. At best they take it in 
the light of an ingenious philosophical conception which provides 
the necessary foundation for certain systems of philosophy. That 
it is related to the hard facts of existence and is based upon a 
close and scientific analysis of the phenomena of human life, they 
would be hardly prepared to accept. 

Purely academic philosophy has always been speculative and 
the essential task of the expounder of a new philosophical system 
is considered to be to provide a plausible explanation of the 
fundamental facts of life and existence. Some of these explana- 
tions which form the basis of certain philosophical systems are 
extraordinarily ingenious expositions and illustrations of reasoned 
thought, but they are purely speculative and are based on the 
superficial phenomena of life observed through the senses. 
Philosophy is considered to be a branch of learning concerned 
with evolving theories about life and the Universe. Whether 
these theories are correct and help in solving the real problems of 
life is not the concern of the philosopher. He has only to see that 
the theory which he puts forward is intellectually sound and 
provides an explanation of the observed facts of life with the 
maximum of plausibility. Its value lies in its rationality and 
ingeniousness and possibly intellectual brilliance, not in its capacity 
to provide a means of overcoming the miseries and sufferings 
incidental to human life. No wonder academic philosophy is 
considered barren and futile by the common man and treated 
with indifference, if not with veiled contempt. 

Now, in the East, though many ingenious and purely specula- 
tive philosophies have been expounded from time to time, philo- 
sophy has been considered, on the whole, as a means of expounding 



132 



section n (3) 



the real and deeper problems of human life and providing clear-cut 
and effective means for their solution. There is not much demand 
for purely speculative systems of philosophy and such as exist are 
treated with a kind of amused tolerance as intellectual curiosities 
— nothing more. The great problem of human life is too urgent, 
too serious, too profound, too awful to leave any room for the 
consideration of mere intellectual theories, however brilliant these 
might be. If your house is on fire you want a means of escape 
and are not in a mood to sit down and read a brilliant thesis on 
architecture at that time. Those who can remain satisfied with 
purely speculative philosophies have not really understood the 
great and urgent problem of human life and its deeper significance. 
If they see this problem as it really is then they can be interested 
only in such philosophies as offer effective means for its solution. 

Although the perception of the inner significance of the real 
problem of human life is dependent upon an inner change in 
consciousness and awakening of our spiritual faculties and cannot 
be brought about by an intellectual process of reasoning imposed 
from without, still, let us consider man in time and space and see 
whether his circumstances justify the extraordinary complacency 
which we find out only among the common people but also 
among the so-called philosophers. 

Let us first consider man in space. In giving us a true picture 
of man in the physical Universe of which he is a part nothing has 
helped us so much as the discoveries of modern Science. Even 
before man could use a telescope the vision of the sky at night 
filled him with awe and wonder at the immensity of the Universe 
of which he was an insignificant part. But the researches of 
astronomers have shown that the physical Universe is almost 
unbelievably larger than what it appears to the naked eye. The 
6,000 stars that are within the range of our unaided vision form, 
according to Science, a group which is only one among at least 
a billion other groups which stretch out to infinity in every 
direction. Astronomers have made a rough calculation of the 
number of stars that are within the range of the high-powered 
telescopes available these days and think there may be as many 
as 100 billion stars in our galaxy alone, some smaller than our 
sun and others very much bigger. This galaxy which is only 



SADHANA PADA 



133 



one of 100,000 already definitely known to astronomers is so 
vast that light with a speed of 186,000 miles per second takes 
about 100,000 years to travel from one side to the other. In this 
vast ' known ' Universe even our Solar system with its maximum 
orbital (of planets) diameter of 7 billion miles occupies an insigni- 
ficant place by comparison. Narrowing down our vision to the 
Solar system we again find that the earth occupies only an 
insignificant place in the huge distances that are involved. It has 
a diameter of 8,000 miles compared with 865,000 miles of the 
sun and moves slowly in its orbit round the sun at an approximate 
distance of 93 million miles. Coming down still further to our 
earth we find man occupying an insignificant position as far as his 
physical body is considered. A microbe moving over the surface 
of a big school globe is physically a formidable object in com- 
parison with man moving over the surface of the earth. 

This is the awful picture that Science gives of man in the 
physical Universe, but so great is the illusion of Maya and the 
complacence which it engenders that we not only do not wonder 
about human life and tremble at our destiny but go through life 
engrossed in our petty pursuits, and sometimes even obsessed with 
a sense of self-importance. Even the scientists who scan this vast 
Universe every night with their telescopes remain unaware of the 
profound significance of what they see. 

The picture which Science presents of our physical world in 
its infinitesimal aspect is no less disconcerting. That physical 
matter constituting our bodies consisted of atoms and molecules 
has been known for quite a long time. But the recent researches 
of Science in this field have led to some startling discoveries. The 
hard and indestructible atoms which constituted the bed-rock of 
modern scientific materialism have been found to be nothing 
more than different permutations and combinations of two funda- 
mental types of positive and negative charged particles — protons 
and electrons. The protons form the core of the atom with 
electrons in varying numbers revolving round it in different orbits 
with tremendous speed, an atom being thus a Solar system in 
miniature. And what is still more startling, it has been found that 
these electrons may be nothing but charges of electricity with no 
material basis because mass and energy become indistinguishable 



134 



section n (3) 



at the high speed at which electrons move in their orbits. In 
fact, the conversion of matter into energy which has now become 
an accomplished fact shows that matter may be nothing more 
than an expression of locked-up energy. This conclusion which 
really means that matter disappears into energy has been arrived 
at, by an irony of fate, by the efforts of materialistic science 
which was responsible for giving a tremendous materialistic bias to 
our thinking and living. This hard fact means — and let the 
reader ponder carefully over this problem — that the well-known 
and so-called real world which we cognize with our sense-organs, 
a world of forms, colour, sound, etc., is based upon a phantom 
world containing nothing more than protons and electrons. These 
facts have become matters of common knowledge but how many of 
us, even scientists who work on these problems, seem to grasp the 
significance of these facts ? How many are led to ask the question 
which should so naturally arise in the light of these facts ' What 
is man ? ' Is there any further proof needed that the mere intellect 
is blind and is incapable of seeing even the obvious truths of life, 
much less the Truth of truths ? 

Leaving the world of space let us glance for a while at the 
world of time. Here again we are faced with tremendous immen- 
sities of a different nature. An infinite succession of changes 
seems to extend on both sides into the past and the future. Of 
this endless expanse of time a period of a few thousand years 
just behind us is all that is reliably known to us while we have 
only a vague and hazy conception of what lies in the lap of the 
uncertain future. For aught we know the sun may explode the 
very next moment and destroy all life in the Solar system before 
we know what has happened. We are almost certain that millions 
and millions of years lie behind us but what has happened in 
those years we cannot know except by inference from what we 
observe in the visible Universe of stars around us. The past is 
like a huge tidal wave advancing and devouring everything in its 
path. Magnificent civilizations on our earth of which only traces 
are left and even planets and solar systems have disappeared in 
this tidal wave never to appear again and a similar relentless fate 
awaits everything from a grain of dust to a Solar system. Time, 
the instrument of the Great Illusion devours everything. And yet, 



SADHANA PADA 



135 



look at puny man, whose achievements and glories are also to 
disappear in this void, how he struts about on the world stage 
clothed with brief authority or glory in the few moments which 
have been allotted to him. Surely, this awful panorama of cease- 
less change which is unfolding before his eyes should make him 
pause and at least wonder what is all this about. But does it? 

The above picture of man in time and space is not at all 
over-drawn. A man has only to isolate himself for a while from 
his engrossing environment and ponder over these facts of life to 
realize the illusory nature of his life and to feel the so-called zest 
of life melt away. But few of us have the eyes to look at this 
awful vision, and if by any chance our eyes open accidently for 
a while, we find the prospect too terrifying and shut them again, 
and completely oblivious and unaware of the real nature of life 
continue to live with our joys and sorrows until the flame of life 
is snuffed out by the hand of Death. 

Now, the above picture of man in space and time has been 
given not with a view to provide entertainment for the intellectual- 
ly curious, or even food for thought for the thoughtful, but to 
prepare the ground for the consideration of the philosophy of 
Klesas which forms the foundation of the Togic philosophy. For 
the philosophy of Toga is based on the hard realities of life, harder 
than the realities of Nature given to us by Science. Those who are 
not aware of these realities, or are aware only superficially in their 
intellectual aspects can hardly appreciate the goal or the technique 
of Toga. They may find Toga a very interesting subject for study, 
even fascinating in some of its aspects, but they cannot have the 
determination to go through the tremendous labour and ordeals 
which are required to rend asunder the veils of illusion created 
by Time and Space, and to contact the Reality which is hidden 
behind these veils. 

With this brief introduction let us now turn to consider the 
philosophy of Klesas as it is outlined in the Toga-Sutras. Let us 
first take the Samskrta word Klesa. It means pain, affliction or 
misery but gradually it came to acquire the meaning of what 
causes pain, affliction or misery. The philosophy of Klesas is thus 
an analysis of the underlying and fundamental cause of human 
misery and suffering and the way in which this cause can be 



136 



SECTION II (3) 



removed effectively. This analysis is not based upon a considera- 
tion of the superficial facts of life as observed through the senses. 
The JJ«j who expounded this philosophy were great Adepts who 
combined in themselves the qualifications of a religious teacher, 
scientist and philosopher. With this triple qualification and 
synthetic vision they attacked the great problem of life, determined 
to find a solution of the riddle which Time and Space have created 
for the illusion-bound man. They observed the phenomena of 
life not only with the help of their senses and the mind, but in 
the full conviction that the solution lay beyond even the intellect; 
they dived deeper and deeper into their own consciousness, tearing 
aside veil after veil, until they discovered the ultimate cause of the 
Great Illusion and the misery and suffering which are its inevit- 
able results. They discovered, incidentally, in their search other 
subtler worlds of entrancing beauty hidden beneath the visible 
physical world. They discovered new faculties and powers within 
themselves — 'faculties and powers which could be utilized for 
studying these subtler worlds and pursuing their enquiry into 
still deeper layers of their own consciousness. But they did not 
allow themselves to be entangled by these subtler worlds and did 
not rest content until they had penetrated deep enough within 
their consciousness to find an effective and permanent solution of 
the great problem of life. They discovered in this way not only 
the ultimate cause of human misery and suffering but also the 
only effective means of destroying these afflictions permanently. 

It is very necessary for the student to realize the experimental 
nature of this philosophy of Klesas and the greater philosophy of 
Yoga of which it is an integral part. These are not the results of 
speculation or reasoned thought as many systems of philosophy 
are. The philosophy of Yoga claims to be derived from the results 
of scientific experiments, guided by the spirit of philosophic 
enquiry, inspired by religious devotion. We cannot, obviously, 
verify this essentially scientific system by the ordinary methods of 
Science and say to the sceptic: ' Gome I will prove it before your 
eyes.' We cannot judge it by the ordinary academic standards 
of philosophers who apply purely intellectual criteria for judging 
these things. The only way in which it can be verified is to 
follow the path which was taken by the original discoverers and 



SADHANA PADA 



137 



which is outlined in this system of Yogax The sceptic might feel 
that it is unfair to ask him to assume the validity of what he wants 
to get proved, but this, from the very nature of things, cannot be 
helped. Those who have seen the fundamental problem of life 
in its true aspects will consider the gamble worth taking, for that 
provides the only way out of the Great Illusion. For others it 
does not matter whether they do or do not believe in the teachings 
of Yoga.' They are not yet ready for the Di\ine Adventure. 

Before discussing in detail the philosophy of Klesas as outlined 
in Section II of the Yoga-Sutras it will be desirable to give an 
analysis of the whole subject in the form of a table. This will 
show at a glance the different aspects of the subject and their 
relation to one another. It will be seen from the summary given 
in this table — a fact which is difficult to grasp otherwise — that the 
whole subject has been dealt with in a systematic and masterly 
manner. The student who wants to get a clear insight into the 
philosophy of Klesas will do well, therefore, to go through the 
following summary carefully and ponder over it before taking up 
the detailed study of the subject. 

PHILOSOPHY OF KLESAS— SYNOPSIS 



Question dealt with 
1. What are Kleins? 



2. How are they 
destroyed? 

3. Why should Kleias 
be destroyed? 



4. Can their result — 
miseries of life — 
be destroyed? 

5. What is the 
fundamental cause 
of these miseries? 



Subject 



Enumeration and 
definitions. 

General methods of 
destroying them. 

They involve us in a 
never-ending cycle of 
births and deaths and 
miseries of life. 

Yes, those that are 
still in the future. 



Union and identification 
of the Knower with the 
Known. 



Numbers of Sutras in which 
the subject is dealt with in 
Section II 

3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 



10, 11. 
12, 13, 14, 15. 

16. 

17. 



138 



G«**i de^ with 

What is the 
5- a „ tUre °fthe 

What is the 
■is.no wer? 



SECTION II (3, 4) 



Subject 



SADHANA PADA 



139 



Numbers of Sutras in u>AieA 
<A« ja6/ec* is </"" u«<A in 
Section II 



Interactions of Bhiitas, 
Indriyas and Gunas which 
result in experience and 
liberation. 

The Knower is pure 
consciousness. 



£™f have the For the evolution of 

t^wer and the powers of Prakrti and 

w < % fTy ^en brought for Self-realization 
together? of the Purufa. 

™w have the Through a veil of 

f^°wer and Known illusion caused by 



] 0. Ho. 



y. -■ can the By destroying the veil 

ff^Wer and Known of Avidya. 
De separated? 



"• How 



, c . a u this veil 



12. 



destroyed? 



How can p,V«fca 
^developed? 



By Viveka which leads 
to increasing awareness 
of his own nature by the 
Purufa in 7 stages. 

By the practice of Toga. 



J8, 19. 

20,21,22. 

23. 
24. 
25. 

26, 27. 
28. 



The 



author opens the subject with an enumeration of the 



*ne author opens the subject with an enumeration oi mc 
ve Kles'as in II-3. The English equivalents of the Samskrta words 
° n °t correctly and fully convey the ideas implied and the 
ttglish words which come nearest to the Samkrta names of the 
bsas have been given. The underlying significance of the five 
Kleias W iu be explaine( j m dealing with the subsequent Sutras. 

Avidya ksetram uttaresam prasupta-tanu- 
vicchinnodaran am. 



T 



aifa^r ignorance or lack of awareness of Reality qfcf field; 
source xd xl ^1 M of the following ones 5HJ<r (of) dormant; sleeping 
cPT attenuated;, thin f^S5T scattered; dispersed; alternating ^T- 
TFTnT (and) expanded; fully operative. 

4. Avidya is the source of those that are men- 
tioned after it, whether they be in the dormant, 
attenuated, alternating or expanded condition. 

This Sutra gives two important facts concerning the nature of 
the Kleias. The first is their mutual relationship. Avidya is the 
root-cause of the other four Klesas which in their turn produce all 
the miseries of human life. A closer study of the nature of the 
other four Klesas will show not only that they can grow only on 
the soil of Avidya but also that the five Kles'as form a connected 
series of causes and effects. The relation existing between the 
five Kleias may be likened to the relation of root, trunk, branches, 
leaves and fruit in a tree. The conclusion that the five Kleias 
are related to one another in this manner is further strengthened 
by 11-10 but we shall discuss this question in dealing with that 
Sutra. 

The other idea in this Sutra is the classification of the states 
or conditions in which these Kleias may exist. These four states 
are defined as ( 1 ) dormant, (2) attenuated (3) alternating, (4) 
expanded. The dormant condition is that in which the Kleia is 
present but in a latent form. It cannot find expression for lack of 
proper conditions for its expression and its kinetic energy has 
become potential. The attenuated condition is that in which the 
Kleia is present in a very feeble or tenuous condition. It is not 
active but can become active in a mild degree on a stimulus being 
applied. In the fully expanded condition the Kleia is fully 
operative and its activity is all too apparent like the waves on the 
surface of the sea in a storm. The alternating condition is that in 
which two opposite tendencies overpower each other alternately 
as in the case of two lovers who sometimes become angry and 
affectionate alternately. The feelings of attraction and repulsion 
alternate, though fundamentally they are based on attachment. 



140 



SECTION II (4,5) 



It is only in the case of the advanced Togis that the Klesas are 
present in the dormant form. In the case of ordinary people, the 
KleSas are present in the other three conditions, depending upon 
externa] circumstances. 

Anitya^ucd-duhkhanatmasu nitya-suci- 
sukhatmakhyatir avidya. 

srfeq - (of) non-eternal dwR impure 5:^ misery; pain; 
evil dJHkH^ (and) non- Atman; not- Self ft^T eternal 9[fa" pure 
*g& happiness; pleasure; good asn^T (and) Self *&[&: knowledge; 
consciousness, (taking) srf^JT ignorance. 

5. Avidya is taking the non-eternal, impure, evil 
and non-Atman to be eternal, pure, good and Atman 
respectively. 

This Sutra defiries Avidya the root of the KleSas. It is quite 
obvious that the word Avidya is not used in its ordinary sense of 
ignorance or lack of knowledge, but in its highest philosophical 
sense. In order to grasp this meaning of the word we have to 
recall the initial process whereby, according to the Togic philo- 
sophy, consciousness, the Reality underlying manifestation, becomes 
involved in matter. Consciousness and matter are separate and 
utterly different in their essential nature but for reasons which 
will be discussed in the subsequent Sutras they have to be brought 
together. How can Atmd, which is eternally free and self-sufficient, 
be made to assume the limitations which are involved in the 
association with matter? It is by depriving it of the knowledge or 
rather the awareness of its eternal and self-sufficient nature. This 
deprivation of knowledge of its true nature which involves it in 
the evolutionary cycle is brought about by a^transcendent power 
inherent in the Ultimate Reality which is called Maya or the 
Great Illusion. 



SADHANA PADA 



141 



Of course, this simple statement of a transcendent truth can 
give rise to innumerable philosophical questions such as 'Why 
should it be necessary for the Atmd which is self-sufficient to be 
involved in matter ? ' ' How is it possible for the Atmd which is 
eternal to become involved in the limitations of Time and Space? ' 
There is no real answer to such ultimate questions although many 
answers, obviously absurd, have been suggested by different philos- 
ophers from time to time. According to those who have come face 
to face with Reality and know this secret, the only method by which 
this mystery can be unravelled is to know the Truth which under- 
lies manifestation and which by its very nature is incommunicable. 

As a result of the illusion in which consciousness gets involved 
it begins to identify itself with the matter with which it becomes 
associated. This identification becomes increasingly fuller as 
consciousness descends further into matter until the turning point 
is reached and the upward climb in the opposite direction begins. 
The reverse process of evolution in which consciousness gradually 
extricates itself, as it were, from matter results in an increasing 
realization of its Real nature and ends in complete Self-realization 
in Kaivalya. It is this fundamental privation of knowledge of its 
Real nature, which begins with the evolutionary cycle, is brought 
about by the power of Maya, and ends with the attainment of 
Liberation in Kaivalya, which is called Avidya. Avidya has nothing 
to do with the knowledge which we acquire through the intellect 
and which refers to the things concerning the phenomenal worlds. 
A man may be a great scholar, a walking encyclopaedia as we say, 
and yet may be so completely immersed in the illusions created 
by the mind that he may stand much below a simple-minded 
Sadhaka who is partially aware of the great illusions Of the intellect 
and the life in these phenomenal worlds. The Avidya of the latter 
is much less than that of the former in spite of the tremendous 
difference in knowledge pertaining to the intellect. This absence 
of awareness of our true nature results in the inability to distinguish 
between the eternal, pure, blissful Self and the non-eternal, impure 
and painful not-Self. 

The word ' eternal ' here means as usual the state of con- 
sciousness which is above the limitation of time as we know it 
as a succession of phenomena. 'Pure' refers to the purity of 



142 



SECTION II (5, 6) 



consciousness as it exists unaffected and unmodified by matter 
which imposes upon it the limitation of the three Gimas and con- 
sequent illusions. ' Blissful ', of course, refers to the Ananda or bliss 
of the Atmd which is inherent in it and which is independent of any 
external source or circumstance. The privation of this Sukha or 
bliss, which is inevitable when consciousness is identified with 
matter, is Duhkha or misery. All these three attributes, which have 
been mentioned in the distinction between the Self and the not- 
Self, are merely illustrative and not exhaustive because it is impos- 
sible to define the nature of the Self and to distinguish it from the* 
not-Self in terms of the limited conceptions of the intellect. The 
central idea to be grasped is that the Atmd in its purity is fully 
conscious of its Real nature. Progressive involution in matter 
deprives it of this Self-knowledge in increasing degree and it is the 
privation of this knowledge which is called Avidyd. As the matter 
is one pertaining to the realities beyond the scope of the intellect 
it is not possible to understand it through the medium of the 
intellect alone. 

V <*^H9|cMU*k*<de|lRrHdl I 

Drg-dar£ana-saktyor ekatmatevasmita. 

^~p(*irfer) (of) power of consciousness; seer; Purusa ^SHSR^ft: 
(and) power of seeing; cognition; Buddhi ^kMd T identity; 
blending together ^T as if cRR^dl ' I-am-ness '. 

6. Asmitd is J;he identity or blending together, as 
it were, of the power of consciousness {Purusa) with the 
power of cognition {Buddhi). 

Asmitd is denned in this Sutra as the identification of the 
power of consciousness with the power of cognition, but as the 
power of cognition always works through a vehicle, in its wider 
and more intelligible meaning it may be considered as the identi- 
fication of consciousness with the vehicle through which it is being 
expressed. This is a very important and interesting idea which 



SADHANA PADA 



143 



we should understand thoroughly if we want to master the 
technique of liberating consciousness from the limitations under 
which it works in the ordinary individual. The Samskrta word 
Asmitd is derived from Asmi which means literally ' I am '. 'I am ' 
represents the pure awareness of Self-existence and is therefore the 
expression or Bhdva, as it is called, of pure consciousness or the 
Purusa. When the pure consciousness gets involved in matter and 
owing to the power of Maya, knowledge of its Real nature is lost, 
the pure ' I am ' changes into ' I am this ' where ' this ' may be 
the subtlest vehicle through which it is working, or the grossest 
vehicle, namely the physical body. The two processes, namely 
the loss of awareness of its Real nature and the identification with 
the vehicles are simultaneous. The moment consciousness identi- 
fies itself with its vehicles it has fallen from its pure state and it 
becomes bound by the limitations of Avidyd, or we may say that 
the moment the veil of Avidyd falls on consciousness its identifica- 
tion with its vehicles results immediately, though philosophically 
Avidyd must precede Asmitd. 

The involution of consciousness in matter is a progressive 
process and for this reason though Avidyd and Asmitd begin where 
the thinnest veil of Maya involves pure consciousness in the 
subtlest vehicle, the degree of Avidyd and Asmitd goes on increasing 
as the association of consciousness with matter becomes more and 
more strengthened. As consciousness descends into one vehicle 
after another the veil of Avidyd becomes, as it were, thicker and 
the tendency to identify oneself with the vehicle becomes stronger 
and grosser. On the other hand, when the reverse process takes 
place and consciousness is released from its limitations in its 
evolutionary upward climb, the veil of Avidyd becomes thinner 
and the resulting Asmitd weaker and subtler. This evolution on 
the upward arc takes place in seven definite and clearly marked 
stages as is indicated in IT-27. These stages correspond to the 
transference of consciousness from one vehicle to a subtler vehicle. 

Let us now come down from the abstract principles and 
consider the problem In relation to things with which we are 
familiar and which we can understand more easily. Let us con- 
sider the problem of the expression of consciousness through the 
physical body. We should remember, in considering this question 



144 



SECTION II (6) 



that the consciousness which is normally expressed through the 
physical body is not pure unmodified consciousness being involved 
in a vehicle. It has already passed through several such involu- 
tions and it is already heavily loaded, as it were, when it seeks 
expression through the outermost or grossest vehicle. It is there- 
fore consciousness conditioned by the limitations of all the 
intervening vehicles which form a kind of bridge between it and 
the physical body. But as the process of involution and conse- 
quent identification is in essence the same at each stage of 
involution, we can get some idea of the underlying principles eVen 
though the expression of consciousness through the physical body 
is complicated by the factors referred to above. 

Coming back to our problem we then see that the association 
of consciousness, conditioned as mentioned above, with the phy- 
sical body must lead to this identification with the vehicle and the 
language which is used by all of us in common intercourse reflects 
this fully. We always use such expressions as ' I see ', ' I hear ', 
'I go ', 'I sit '. In the case of the savage and the child this 
identification with the body is so complete that there is not the 
slightest feeling of discrepancy in using such language. But the 
educated and intelligent man, whose identification with the body 
is not quite complete and who feels to a certain extent that he is 
different from the body, is aware at least in a vague manner that 
it is not he who sees, hears, walks and sits. These activities belong 
to the physical body and he is merely witnessing them through 
his mind. Still, from force of habit and disinclination to go deeper 
into the matter, or from fear of appearing odd in using the correct 
language he continues to use. the common phraseology. So deep- 
rooted is this identification that even physiologists, psychologists 
and philosophers, who are supposed to be familiar with the 
mechanism of sense-perception and intellectually recognize the 
mere instrumentality of the physical body, are hardly actively 
aware of this tendency and may identify themselves with the body 
completely. It is worth noting that mere intellectual knowledge 
with regard to such patent facts does not by itself enable a person 
to separate himself from his vehicles. Who has more detailed 
knowledge with regard to the physical body and its functions than 
a doctor who has dissected hundreds of bodies and knows that it 



SADHANA PADA 



145 



is a mere mechanism. One would expect that a doctor at least, 
from whom nothing inside the body is hidden, will be above this 
tendency to regard himself as the body. But is a doctor in any 
way better off in this respect than a layman? Not at all. This 
is not a matter of ordinary seeing and understanding at all. 

Asrrdtd or identification with a vehicle is not a simple but a 
very complex process and has many aspects. The first aspect we 
may consider is identification with the powers and faculties asso- 
ciated with the vehicles. For example, when a person says ' I see ' 
what really happens is that the faculty of sight is exercised by the 
body through the eye and the in-dwelling entity becomes merely 
aware of the result, i.e. the panorama presented before the eye. 
Again, when he says, ' I walk ' what really happens is that the 
will working through the mind moves the body on its legs like a 
portable instrument and the in-dwelling entity identifying himself 
with the movement of the body says, ' I walk '. 

The second aspect is the association of the subtler vehicle in 
this process of identification where a compound Asmitd — if such a 
phrase can be used— is produced. Thus when a person says he 
has a headache what is really happening is that there is a 
slight disorder in the brain. This disorder by its reaction on the 
next subtler vehicle through which sensations and feelings are felt 
produces the sensation of pain. The in-dwelling entity identifies 
himself with this joint product of these two vehicles and this 
results in ' his ' having a headache, although a litde thought wjjl 
show him that it is not he but the vehicle which is having the 
pain of which he is aware. The same thing working at a somewhat 
higher level produces such reactions as ' I think'', ' I approve '. It 
is the mind which thinks and approves and the consciousness 
becomes merely aware of the thought process which is reflected in 
the physical body. Ambition, pride and similar unpleasant traits 
of human character are merely highly developed and perverted 
forms of this tendency to identify ourselves with the workings of 
the mind. 

A third aspect which may be considered in this process of 

identification is the inclusion of other accessories and objects in 

the environment. The physical body becomes a centre round 

which get associated a number of objects which in smaller or 

10 



146 



SECTION II (6) 



greater degree become part of the ' I '. These objects may be 
animate or inanimate. The other bodies which are born of one's 
body become ' my children '. The house in which one's body is 
kept becomes ' my house '. So round the umbra (total shadow) 
created by Asmita with the body is a penumbra (partial shadow) 
containing all those objects and persons which ' belong ' to the 
' I ' working through the body and they produce the attitude or 
Bhdva of my ' and ' mine '. 

The above brief and genera] discussion of Asmita associated 
with the physical body will give some idea to the student with 
regard to the nature of this Kles'a. Of course, Asmita manifesting 
through the physical body is the grossest form of the Klesa and as 
we try to study the working of this tendency in the subtler vehicles 
we find it more and more elusive and difficult to deal with. Any 
thoughtful man can separate himself in thought from his physical 
body and see tha!t he is not the bag of flesh, bones and marrow 
with the help of which he comes in contact with the physical 
world. But few can separate themselves from their intellect and 
realize that their opinions and ideas are mere thought patterns 
produced by their mind just like the thought patterns produced 
by other minds. The reason why we take interest in and attach so 
much importance to our opinions lies, of course, in the fact that 
we identify ourselves with our intellect. Our thoughts, opinions, 
prejudices and predilections are part of our mental possessions, 
children of our mind, and that is why we feel and show such 
undue and tender regard for them. 

Of course, there are levels of consciousness even beyond that 
of the intellect. In all these Asmita is present though it becomes 
subtler and more refined as we leave one vehicle after another. It 
is no use dealing with these subtler manifestations of Asmita here 
because unless one can transcend the intellect and function in these 
super-intellectual fields one cannot really understand them. 

Although the question of destroying the Klesas will be dealt 
with later in subsequent Sutras there is one fact which may be use- 
fully pointed out here. Many methods have been suggested 
whereby this tendency to identify ourselves with our vehicles may 
be gradually attenuated. Many of these methods are quite 
useful and do help us in a certain measure to disentangle our 



SADHANA PADA 



147 



consciousness from our vehicles. But it has to be borne in mind 
that complete dissociation from a vehicle takes place only when 
consciousness is able to leave the vehicle deliberately and con- 
sciously and function in the next subtler vehicle (of course, with 
all the still subtler vehicles present in the background). When 
the Jivatma is able to leave a vehicle at will and ' see ' it separate 
from himself then only is the false sense of identification completely 
destroyed. We may meditate for years trying to separate our- 
selves in thought from the body but the result of this will not be 
as great as one experience of leaving it consciously and seeing it 
actually separate from ourselves. We shall, of course, re-enter 
that body and assume all its limitations but it can never again 
exercise on us the same illusory influence as it did before. We 
have realized that we are different from the body. For the 
advanced Togi who can and does leave his body every now and 
then and can function independently of it in a routine manner, it 
is just like a dwelling house. The very idea of identifying himself 
with the body will appear absurd to him. It will be seen, there- 
fore, that practice of Toga is the most effective means of destroying 
Asmita completely and permanently. As the Yogi leaves one 
vehicle of consciousness after another in Samadhi he destroys pro- 
gressively the tendency to identify himself with those vehicles and 
with the destruction of Asmita in this manner the veil oiAvidya 
automatically becomes thinner. 

V9. g*nwft TPT: I 

Sukhanusayl ragah. 

gg 1 pleasure; happiness ai^gpft accompanying ; resulting 
(from) TIT: attraction; liking. 

7. That attraction, which accompanies pleasure, 
is Rdga. 

Rdga is defined in this Sutra as the attraction which one feels 
towards any person or object when any kind of pleasure or happi- 
ness is derived from that person or object. It is natural for us to 



148 



SECTION II (7, 8) 



get attracted in this manner because the soul in bondage, having 
lost the direct source of Ananda within, gropes after Ananda in the 
external world and anything which provides even a shadow of 
this in the form of ordinary happiness or pleasure becomes dear 
to it. If we are attracted to any person or object we shall always 
find on scrutiny that the attraction is due to some kind of pleasure, 
physical, emotional or mental. We may be addicted to a partic- 
ular kind of food because we find it pleasant. We may be 
attached to a person because we derive from him some kind of 
pleasure, physical or emotional. We may be devoted to " a 
particular pursuit because it gives us intellectual satisfaction. 

Duhkhanusayl dvesah. 

^•M pain; 3R?pft accompanying; resulting (from), gq - : 
repulsion. 

8. That repulsion which accompanies pain is 
Dvesa. 

Dvesa is the natural repulsion felt towards any person or 
object which is a source of pain or unhappiness to us. The 
essential nature of the Self is blissful' and therefore anything 
which brings pain or unhappiness in the outer world makes the 
outer vehicles recoil from that thing. What has been said about 
Raga is applicable to Dvesa in an opposite sense because Dvesa is 
only Raga in the negative, the two together forming a pair of 
opposites. 

As these two Klelas form the most prominent part of the 
fivefold tree which provides the innumerable fruits of human 
misery and suffering it is worthwhile taking note of a few facts 
concerning them. 

( 1 ) The attractions and repulsions which bind us to innumer- 
able persons and things, in the manner indicated above, condition 
our life to an unbelievable extent. Unconsciously or consciously 
we think, feel and act according to hundreds of these biases 



SADHANA PADA 



149 



produced by these invisible bonds and there is hardly any freedom 
left for the individual to act, feel. and think freely. The condition- 
ing of the mind which takes place when we are under the domi- 
nation of any overpowering attraction or repulsion is recognized, 
but few people have any idea of the distortion produced in our 
life by the less prominent attractions and repulsions or the extent 
to which our life is conditioned by them. 

(2) These attractions and repulsions bind us down to the 
lower levels of consciousness because it is only in these levels that 
they can have free play. It is a fundamental law of life that we 
find ourselves sooner or later where our conscious or unconscious 
desires can be satisfied. Since these attractions and repulsions are 
really the breeders of desires pertaining to the lower life they 
naturally keep us tied down to the lower worlds where conscious- 
ness is under the greatest limitations. 

(3) The repulsions bind us as much as the attractions. Many 
people are vaguely aware of the binding nature of the attractions 
but few can understand why repulsions should bind an individual. 
But repulsions bind as much as the attractions because they also 
are the expression of a force connecting the two components which 
are repelled from each other. We are tied to the person we hate 
perhaps more firmly than to the person we love, because the 
persona] love can be transformed into impersonal love easily and 
then loses its binding power. But it is not so easy to transmute 
the force of hatred and the poison generated by it is removed 
from one's nature with great difficulty. As Raga and Dvesa form 
a pair of opposites we cannot transcend one without transcending 
the other. They are like two sides of a coin. In the light of what 
is said above it will be seen that Vairdgya is not only freedom from 
Raga but also freedom from Dvesa. A free and unconditioned 
mind does not oscillate from side to side. It remains stationary 
at the centre. 

(4) Attractions and repulsions really belong to the vehicles 
but owing to the identification of consciousness with its vehicles 
we feel that we are being attracted or repelled. When we begin 
to control and eliminate these attractions and repulsions we 
gradually become aware of this fact and this knowledge then 
enables us to control and eliminate them more effectively. 



150 



SECTION II (8, 9) 



(5) That Raga and Doesa in their gross form are responsible 
for much of human misery and suffering will become apparent to 
anyone who can view life dispassionately and can trace causes 
and effects intelligently. But only those who systematically try to 
attenuate the Klesas by means of Kriya-Yoga can see the subtler 
workings of these Klelas, how they permeate the whole fabric of 
our worldly life and prevent us from having any peace of mind. 

Svarasavahi viduso 'pi tatha rudho 'bhini- 
vesah. 

^TSRTjft sustained by its own forces; flowing on automatically 
Gt^i: the learned (or wise) 3TpT even ^T*TT in that way ^5: riding; 
dominating 3rfapH!«: great fear of death; strong desire for life; 
thorough infiltration (of the mind); will-to-live. 

9. Abkinivesa is the strong desire for life which 
dominates even the learned (or the wise). 

The last derivative of Avidya is called Abkinivesa. It is 
generally translated as desire for life or wijU-to-live. That every 
human being, in fact every living creature, wants to continue to 
live is, of course, a fact with which everyone is familiar. We 
sometimes see people who have nothing to gain from life. Their 
life is one long drawn-out misery and yet their attachment to life 
is as great as ever. The reason for this apparent anomaly is, of 
course, that the other four Kleias which result in desire for life or 
AbhiniveJa are in full operation even in the absence of unfavourable 
external-circumstances. 

There are two points in this Sutra which require some expla- 
nation. First, that this strong attachment to life which is universal 
is well established even in the learned. One may expect ordinary 
people to feel this attachment but a wise man at least who knows 
all about the realities of life may be expected to sit lightly on life. 
But as a matter of fact, this is not so. The philosopher who is 



SADHANA PADA 



151 



well versed in all the philosophies of the world and knows 
intellectually all the deeper problems of life is as much attached 
to life as the ordinary person who is ignorant about these things. 
The reason why Patanjali has pointed out this fact definitely lies 
perhaps in his intention to bring to the notice of the would-be 
Yogi that mere knowledge of the intellect (Vidusah here really 
means the learned and not the wise) is in itself inadequate for 
freeing a man from this attachment to life. Unless and" until the 
tree of Klesas is destroyed, root and branch, by a systematic course 
of Yogic discipline the attachment to life in smaller or greater 
degree will continue in spite of all the philosophies we may know 
or preach. The would-be Yogi, therefore, places no reliance on 
such theoretical knowledge. He treads the path of Yoga which 
alone can bring freedom from the Klesas. 

The second point to be noted in this Sutra is contained in the 
phrase Svarasavahi which means sustained by its own inherent force 
or potency. The universality of Abkinivesa shows that there is some 
constant and universal force inherent in life which automatically 
finds expression in this ' desire to live '. . The desire to live is not 
the result of some accidental development in the course of evolu- 
tion. It seems to be an essential feature of that process. What is 
this all-powerful force which seems to underlie the current of life 
and which makes every living creature stick to life like a leech all 
the time? According to the Yogic philosophy this force is rooted in 
the very origin of things and it comes into play the moment con- 
sciousness comes in contact with matter and the evolutionary cycle 
begins. As was pointed out in II-4 Avidya is the root of all the 
Klesas and Abkinivesa is merely the fruit or the final expression of 
the chain of causes and effects set in motion with the birth of 
Avidya and the involution of consciousness in matter. 

It was pointed out earlier that the different Klesas are not 
unconnected with one another. They form a sort of series begin- 
ning with Avidya and ending with Abkinivesa. This view is supported 
by 11-10 according to which the method by. which the subtle 
forms of Klesas can be destroyed is by reversing the process by 
which they are produced. According to this view, then, 
Abkinivesa is merely the final phase in the development of the 
Klelas and that is why it is Svarasavahi. Until the initial cause 



152 



SECTION II (9, 10) 



disappears the subsequent effects must continue to appear in an 
unending flow. 

In the connected series of Klesas, Raga and Dvesa appear as 
the immediate cause of attachment to life. It follows from this that 
the greater the play of attractions and repulsions in the life of an 
individual the greater must be his attachment to life. Observation 
of life shows that this is to a great extent true. It is people who 
are under* the domination of most violent attractions and repulsions 
who are most attached to life. We also find that in old age these 
attractions and repulsions temporarily lose their force to some 
extent and pari passu the desire for life also becomes compara- 
tively feebler. 

Te pratiprasava-heyah suksmaJi. 

3" they ufdHtM re-absorption; re-mergence; resolution into 
respective cause or origin ^TT: capable of being reduced or 
avoided or abolished ^$Hi: subtle. 

10. These, the subtle ones, can be reduced by 
resolving them backward into their origin. 

In 11-10 and 11-11 Patanjali gives the general principles of 
first attenuating the Klesas and finally destroying them. The 
Klesas can exist in two states, active and potential. In their active 
state they can be recognized easily by their outer expressions and 
the definite awareness which they produce in the mind of the 
Sadhaka. In the case of a person who is in a fit of anger it is easy 
to see that Dvesa is in full operation. The same person when he 
subjects himself to a rigid self-discipline acquires the capacity to 
keep himself absolutely caJm and without repulsion towards any 
one and thus reduces this Klesa to a potential condition. Dvesa 
has ceased to function but its germs are still there and, given very 
favourable conditions, can be made active again. Their power has 
become potential but not completely destroyed. The transition 



SADHAKA pada 



153 



from the fully active to the perfectly dormant condition takes 
place through a number of stages which have been pointed out in 
II-4- Through the practice of Kriya-Yoga they can be attenuated 
progressively until they become quite dormant, incapable of being 
aroused by ordinary stimuli from the external world. But given 
extraordinary conditions they can be made active again. So we 
have to deal with two problems in the complete elimination of the 
Klesas, first to reduce them to the inactive or Suksma state and then 
to destroy even their potential power. The first is referred to 
generally as reducing the Klesas to the form of ' seeds ' which 
under favourable conditions have still the power to grow into a 
tree, and the second as ' scorching the seeds ' so that while they 
may retain the outer form of the ' seeds ' they have really become 
incapable of germinating and growing into a tree. 

The problem of reducing the Klesas to the condition of seeds ' 
is itself divisible under two sub-heads, that of reducing the fully 
active forms to the attenuated forms (Tanu) and then reducing 
the latter to the extremely inactive condition (Prasupta) from 
which they cannot be aroused easily. Since the first of these two 
problems is the more important and fundamental in its nature 
Patanjali has dealt with it first in 11-10. The second problem of 
reducing the active forms of the Klesas to the partially latent 
condition, being comparatively easier, is dealt with in 11-41, though 
in Sadhand it really precedes the first problem. 

In 11-10 the method of reducing the Klesas which have been 
attenuated to the dormant stage has been hinted at. The 
phraseology used by Patanjali is extremely apt and expressive but 
many people find it difficult to understand the meaning of this 
pregnant Sutra. The phrase Pratiprasava means involution or 
re-absorption of effect into cause or reversing the process ofPrasava 
or evolution. If a number of things are derived in a series from a 
primary thing by a process of evolution they can all be reduced to 
the original thing by a counter-process of involution and such a 
counter process is called Pratiprasava. Let us consider the under- 
lying significance of this phrase in the present context. 

We have seen already that the five Klesas mentioned in II-3 
are not independent of each other but form a series beginning 
with Avidyd and ending with Abhinivesa. The process of the 



154 



SECTION II (10) 



development of Avidya into its final expression Athinivesa is a causal 
process, one stage naturally and inevitably leading to the next one. 
It is therefore inevitable that if we want to remove the final 
element of this fivefold series we must reverse the process whereby 
each effect is absorbed in its immediate cause and the whole series 
disappears. It is a question of removing all or none. This means 
that Abhinivesa should be traced back to Raga-Dvesa, Raga-Dvesa 
to Asmild, Asmitd to Avidya, and Avidya to Enlightenment. This 
tracing backward is not merely an intellectual recognition but a 
realization which nullifies the power of the Klesas to affect the 
mind cf the Yogi. This realization can come to a certain extent 
on the physical plane but is attained in its fullness on the higher 
planes when the Yogi can rise in Samddhi to those planes. It will; 
therefore, be seen from what has been said above that there is no 
short-cut to the attenuation and final destruction of the Klesas. 
It involves the whole technique of Yogic discipline. 

The fact that the subtle forms of Klesas remain in their ' seed.' 
form even after they have been attenuated to the extreme limit is 
of great significance. It means that the Sddhaka is not free from 
danger until he has crossed the threshold of Kaivalya and reached 
the final goal. As long as these ' seeds ' lurk within him there is 
no knowing when he may become their victim. It is these 
unscorched ' seeds ' of KlpJas which account for the sudden and 
unexpected fall of Yogis after they have reached great heights of 
illumination and power. This shows the necessity of exercising the 
utmost discrimination right up to the very end of the Path. 

When the latent forms of Klesas have been attenuated to the 
utmost limit and the resulting tendencies have been made extremely 
feeble — brought almost to the zero level — the question arises, 
' How to destroy the potentiality of these tendencies so that there 
may be no possibility of their Tevival under any circumstances? ' 
How to scorch the ' seeds ' of Klesas so that they cannot germinate 
again ? This is a very important question for the advanced Yogi 
because his work has not been completed until this has been done. 
The answer to this question follows from the very nature of the 
Klesas which has been discussed previously. If the Klesas are 
rooted in Avidya they cannot be destroyed until Avidya is destroyed. 
This means that no freedom from the subtlest forms of the Klesas 



SADHANA PADA 



155 



is possible until full Enlightenment of Kaivalya is attained through 
the practice of Dharma-Megha-Samadhi. This conclusion is con- 
firmed by IV-30 according to which freedom from Klesas and 
Karmas is obtained only after Dharma-Megha-Samadhi which pre- 
cedes the attainment of Kaivalya. 



Dhyana-heyas tad-vrttayah. 

S3TFT (by) meditation f^TT: {Klesas which are) to be avoided 
d^rH: their modifications; ways of existing; activities. 

11. Their active modifications are to be sup- 
pressed by meditation. 

This Sutra gives the method of dealing with the Klesas in the 
preliminary stage when they have to be reduced from an active to 
a passive state. The means to be adopted are given in one word 
Dhyana. It is therefore necessary to understand the meaning of 
this word in its full scope. The word Dhyana, of course, literally 
means meditation or contemplation as explained elsewhere but 
here it obviously stands for a rather comprehensive self-discipline 
of which meditation is the pivot. It is easy to see that a Sddhaka 
who is under the domination of Klesas in their active form will 
have to attack the problem from many sides at once. In 
fact, the whole technique of Kriya-Yoga will have to be utilized 
for this purpose, for one of the two objects of Kriya-Yoga is to 
attenuate the Klesas and the reduction of the Klesas from their 
active to the passive form is the first step in this attenuation. 
Svddhydya, Tapas and Isvara-pranidhdna, all the three elements of 
Kriya-Yoga, have therefore to be used in this wozk. But the essential 
part of all these three is really Dhyana? the intensive concentration 
of the mind in order to understand the deeper problems of life and 
to solve them effectively for the realization of one's main objective. 
Even Tapas, the element of Kriya-Yoga which outwardly seems 
to involve merely going through certain self-disciplinary and 



156 



SECTION II (11) 



purificatory exercises, depends for its effectiveness to a large extent 
on Dhyana. For, it i» not the mere external performance of the act 
which brings about the desired result but the inner concentration 
of purpose and the alert mind which underlie the act. Jf these 
latter are not present the outer action will be of no avail. No 
success in Toga is possible unless all the energies of the soul are 
polarized and harnessed for achieving the central purpose. So 
the word Dhyana in 11-11 implies all mental processes and exercises 
which may help the Sadhaka to reduce the active Klesas to the 
passive condition. It may include reflection, brooding over the 
deeper problems of life, changing habits of thought and attitudes 
by means of meditation (11-33), Tapas as well as meditation in the 
ordinary sense of the term. 

It is necessaiy to note in this connection that reducing the 
Klesas to a latent or passive condition does not mean merely 
bringing them to a temporary state of quiescence. Violent 
disturbances of the mind and emotions which result from the 
activity of the Klesas (Kles'a-Vrtti) are not always present and we 
all pass through phases in which Klesas like Rdga-Dvesa seem to 
have become latent. A Sadhaka may retire for sometime into 
solitude. As long as he is cut off from all kinds of social relation- 
ships, Raga and Dvesa will naturally become inoperative but that 
does not mean that he has reduced these to a latent state. It is 
only their outer expression which has been suspended and the 
moment he resumes his social life these Klesas will re-assert them- 
selves with their usual force. Reducing the Klesas to the latent 
state means making the tendencies so feeble that they are not 
easily aroused, though they have not yet been rooted out. 

Another point which may be noted is that attacking one 
particular form or expression of a Kleia is not of much avail, though 
in the beginning this may be done to gain some knowledge of 
the working of the Klesas and the technique of mastering them. 
A Klesa can assume innumerable forms of expression and if we 
merely suppress one of its expressions it will assume other forms. 
It is the general tendency which has to be tackled and it is this 
isolation, as it were, of this tendency and tackling it as a whole 
which tests the intelligence of the Sadhaka and determines the 
success of the endeavour. 



S&DHANA. PJLDA 157 

Klesa-miilah karmasayo drstadrsta-janma- 
vedanivah. 



*f#9PT5T: rooted in KleJas 3>T?9PT: reservoir of Karmas; the 
vehicle of the seeds of Karma <l*Z seen; present 3R^£ unseen; 
future sirJT lives 3<*«f|^: to be known; to be experienced. 

12. The reservoir of Karmas which are rooted in 
Klesas brings all kinds of experiences in the present and 
future lives. 

Sutras 12, 13 and 14 give in a very concise and lucid manner 
the essential features of the twin laws of Karma and Reincarnation, 
the well-known doctrines formulating the Universal Moral Law 
and cycle of births and deaths underlying human life. As the 
students of Toga are generally familiar with the broad aspects of 
these doctrines it is not necessary to discuss them here and we 
shall confine ourselves to the particular aspects referred to in these 
three Sutras. It may be pointed out at the very outset that 
Patanjali has not attempted to give us a general idea concerning 
the Laws of Karma and Reincarnation. His object is merely to 
show the underlying cause of human misery so that we may be 
able to appreciate the means adopted in Togic discipline for its 
effective removal. He, therefore, takes only those particular 
aspects of these laws which are needed for his argument. But, 
incidentally, he has given in three brief Sutras the very essence 
of these all-embracing laws. 

The first idea given in 11-12 which we have to note is that 
Klesas are the underlying cause of the Karmas we generate by our 
thoughts, desires and actions. Each human soul goes through a 
continuous series of incarnations reaping the fruits of thoughts, 
desires, and actions done in the past and generating, during the 
process of reaping, new causes which will bear their fruits in this 
or future lives. So every human life is like a flowing current in 



158 



SECTION II (12) 



which two processes are at work simultaneously, the working out 
oF Karmas made in the past and the generation of new Karmas 
which will bear fruit in the future. Each thought, desire, emotion 
and action produces its corresponding result with mathematical 
exactitude and this result is recorded naturally and automatically 
in our life's ledger. 

What is the nature of this recording mechanism upon which 
depends the working out of causes and effects with mathematical 
precision? The answer to this question is contained only in one 
word, Karmasaya, given in this Sutra. This word means literally the 
reservoir or sleeping place of Karmas. Karmasaya, obviously, refers 
to the vehicle in our inner constitution which serves as the recep- 
tacle of all the Samskdras or impressions made by our thoughts, 
desires, feelings and actions. This vehicle serves as a permanent 
record of all that we havd' -thought, felt or done during the long 
course of evolution extending over a series of lives and provides 
patterns and contents of the successive lives. People who are 
familiar even with elementary physiology should find no difficulty 
in understanding and appreciating this idea because the impres- 
sions produced in our brain by our experiences on the physical 
plane provide an exact parallel. Everything which we have 
experienced through our sense-organs is recorded in the brain and 
can be recovered in the form of memory of those experiences. We 
cannot see these impressions and yet we know that they exist. 

Students who are familiar with Hindu philosophical thought 
will find no difficulty in identifying this KarmaJaya with the 
Karana Sarira or ' causal body ' in the Vedantic classification of our 
inner constitution. This is one of the subtle vehicles of conscious- 
ness which lies beyond the Manomaya Kosa and is so called because 
it is the source of all causes which will be set in motion and will 
mould our present and future lives. It is the receptacle into 
which the effects of all that we do are being constantly poured in 
and being transformed into causes of experiences which we shall 
go through in this and future lives. 

Now, the important point to note here is that though this 
' causal ' vehicle is the immediate or effective cause of the present 
and future lives and from it, to a great extent, flow the experiences 
which constitute those lives, still, the real or ultimate cause of 



SADHANA PADA 



159 



these experiences are the Klesas. Because, it is the Klesas which 
are responsible for the continuous generation of Karmas and the 
causal vehicle merely serves as a mechanism for adjusting the 
effects of these Karmas. 

Sati mule tad-vipako jaty-ayur-bhogah. 

^rfrT ira" there being the root cTC (of) it (Karmasaya) fk^FP: 
fruition; ripening 3rr% class 3TRT: (span of) life vftTT: (and) 
experiences. 

13. As long as the root is there it must ripen and 
result in lives of different class, length and experiences. 

As long as the Klesas are operating in the life of an individual 
the vehicle of Karmas will be continually nourished by the addition 
of new causal impressions and there is no possibility of the series 
of lives coming to an end. If the root remains intact the Samskaras 
in the causal vehicle will naturally continue to ripen and produce 
one life after another with its inevitable misery and suffering. 
Though the nature and content of experiences gone through by 
human beings in their lives is of infinite variety, Patanjali has 
classified these under three heads (1) class, (2) length of life, and 
(3) pleasant or unpleasant nature of the experiences. These are 
the principal features which determine the nature of a life. First, 
Jati or class. This determines the environment of the individual 
and thus his opportunities and the type of life which he will be 
able ta lead A man born in a slum has not the same opportun- 
ities as a man born among cultured people. So the kind of life 
a person has is determined in the first place by Jati. 

The second important factor is the length of life. This 
naturally determines the total number of experiences. A life cut 
short in childhood contains a comparatively smaller number of 
experiences than a long life running its normal course. Of course, 
since the successive lives of an individual form one continuous 



160 



SECTION D (13, 14) 



whole, from the larger point of view, a short life intervening in 
this manner does not really matter very much. It is as if a person 
could not have a full day for work but had to go to bed early. 
Another day dawns when he can continue his work as usual. 

The third factor is the nature of the experiences gone through 
as regards their pleasant or unpleasant quality. Jati also deter- 
mines the nature of the experiences but there we consider the 
experiences in relation to the opportunities for the growth of the 
soul. Under Bkoga we consider experiences in relation to their 
potentiality to bring pain or pleasure to the individual. There 
are some people who are well placed in life but have a difficult 
time — nothing but suffering and unhappiness from birth to death. 
On the other hand, we may have a life lived in comparatively poor 
circumstances but the experiences may be pleasant all along. The 
pleasures and pains which we have to bear are not entirely depen- 
dent upon our Jati. There is a personal factor involved as we can 
ourselves see by observing the lives of people around us. 

V- % f^KHf<dl44wll: ^l^^cjM I 

Te hlada-paritapa-phalah punyapunya- 
hetutvat. 

% they 1|TC joy MpCdlM (and) sorrow -T^TT: (having for their) 
fruit 5>rcr merit as opposed to sin or demerit anpnr demerit; sin 
(yrcr and arjoq - are the assets and liabilities superphysically 
registered in the soul) ^d^ld being caused by; on account of. 

14. They have joy or sorrow for their fruit 
according as their cause is virtue or vice. 

Upon what depends the nature of the experiences we have to 
go through in life? Since everything in the universe works 
according to a hidden and immutable law it cannot be due to 
mere chance that some of these experiences are joyful and others 
are sorrowful. What determines this pleasurable or painful quality 
of the experiences? 11-14 gives an answer to this question. The 



SADHANA PADA 



161 



pleasurable or painful quality of experiences which come in our 
life is determined by the nature of the causes which have produced 
them. The effect is always naturally related to the cause and its 
na ftire is determined by the cause. Now, those thoughts, feelings 
and actions which are 'virtuous' give rise to experiences which 
are pleasant while those which are 'vicious' give rise to experi- 
ences which are unpleasant. But we must not take the words 
virtuous ' and ' vicious ' in their narrow, orthodox religious sense 
but in the wider and scientific sense of living in conformity with 
the great Moral Law which is universal in its action and mathe- 
matical in its expression. In Nature the effect is always related 
to the cause and corresponds exactly to the cause which has set it 
in motion. If we cause a little purely physical pain to somebody 
it is reasonable to suppose that the fruit of our action will be some 
experience causing a corresponding physical pain to us. It cannot 
be a dreadful calamity causing terrible mental agony. This will 
be unjust and the Law of Karma is the expression of the most 
perfect justice that we can conceive of. Since Karma is a natural 
law and natural laws work with mathematical precision we can to 
a certain extent predict the Karmic results of our actions and 
thoughts by imagining their consequences. The Karmic result, or 
' fruit ' as it is generally called, of an action is related to the action 
as a photographic copy is related to its negative, though the com- 
pounding of several effects in one experience may make it difficult 
to trace the effects to their respective causes. The orthodox 
religious conceptions of hell and heaven, in which are provided 
rewards and punishments without any regard for the natural 
relationship of causes and effects, are sometimes absurd in the 
extreme though they do, in a general way^relate virtue to pleasure 
and vice to pain. 



<U. 



Parinama-tapa-sarnskara-duhkhair guna- 
vrtti-virodhac ca duhkham eva sarvarp 
vivekinah. 



li 



162 



SECTION H (15) 



MfVuiH (on account of) change <TPT acute anxiety; suffering 
*i<H>K impression; stamping with a tendency ^ : ^ : P 3 ^* (three 
causes mentioned above) ^Tor (between the three) Gunas ^f^T (and) 
modification (of the mind) fa 0*1 1^ on account of opposition or 
conflict ^ and 5^*T (is) pain ; misery trq- only fa3(«M: to the en- 
lightened; to the person who has developed discrimination. 

15. To the people who have developed discrimi- 
nation all is misery on account of the pains resulting 
from change, anxiety and tendencies, as also on account 
of the conflicts between the functioning of the Gunas 
and the Vrttis (of the mind) . 

If virtue and vice beget respectively pleasurable and painful 
experiences the question may arise ' Why not adopt the virtuous 
life to ensure in time an uninterrupted series of pleasurable experi- 
ences and to eliminate completely all painful experiences? '. Of 
course, for some time the results of vicious actions we have done 
in the past would continue to appear but if we persist in our efforts 
and make our life continuously and strictly moral, eliminating 
vice of every description, a time must come when the Samskaras 
and Karmas created from vicious thoughts and actions in the past 
would get exhausted and life thenceforth must become a continu- 
ous series of pleasant and happiness-giving experiences. This is a 
line of thought which will appeal especially to the aspirant who 
is having a nice time and is attached to the nice things of the 
world. The philosophy of KleSas will appear to him unnecessarily 
harsh and pessimistic and the ideal of a completely virtuous life 
will seem to provide a very happy solution of the great problem of 
life. It will satisfy his innate moral and religious sense and ensure 
for him the happy and pleasant life that he really wants. The 
orthodox religious ideal which requires people to be good and 
moral so that they may have a happy life here and hereafter is 
really a concession to human weakness and the desire to prefer the 
so-called happiness in life to Enlightenment. 



SADHANA PADA 



163 



This idea of ensuring a happy life by means of virtue, apart 
from the impracticability of living a perfectly virtuous life con- 
tinuously while still bound by illusion, is based on a delusion about 
the very nature of what the ordinary man calls happiness and 
11-15 explains why this is so. This is perhaps one of the most 
important Sutras, if not the most important, bearing on the philo- 
sophy of Kleias and a real grasp of the significance of the funda- 
mental idea expounded in it is necessary not only for understanding 
the philosophy of Klesas but the Yogic philosophy as a whole. Not 
until the aspirant has realized to some extent the illusion underlying 
the so-called ' happiness ' which he pursues in the world can he 
really give up this futile pursuit and devote himself whole-heartedly 
to the task of transcending the Great Illusion and finding that 
Reality m which alone can one find true Enlightenment and 
Peace. Let the serious student, therefore, ponder carefully over 
the profound significance of this Sutra. 

The Sutra in general means that all experiences are either 
actively or potentially full of misery to the wise person whose 
spiritual perception has become awakened. This is so because 
certain conditions like change, anxiety, habituation and conflicts 
between the functioning of the Gunas and Vrttis are inherent in life 
Let us take up each of these conditions and see what it means 

Parinama: means change. It should be obvious to the most 
unintelligent man that life, as we know it,is governed by a relentless 
law of change which is all-pervasive and applies to all things at 
all times. Nothing in life abides right from a Solar system to a 
grain of dust, and all things are in a state of flux though the 
change may be very slow, so slow that we may not be conscious 
of it. One effect of Maya is to make us unconscious of the con- 
tinuous changes which are taking place within and without us 
People are afraid of death but they do not see the fact that death 
is merely an incident in the continuous series of changes in and 
around us. When the realization of this continuous, relentless 
change affecting everything in life dawns upon an individual he 
begins to realize what illusion means. This realization is a very 
definite experience and is one aspect of Viveka, the faculty of dis 
crimination. The ordinary man is so immersed and completely 
identified with the life in which he is involved that he cannot 



164 



section n (15) 



separate himself mentally from this fast moving current. Theoreti- 
cally he may recognize the law of change but he has no realization. 

The first result of this realization when Viveka dawns is fear. 
The very ground from under our feet seems to have been cut 
away; We seem to have no foothold, nothing to which we can 
hold on in this fast-moving current of time and material changes. 
The whole Universe appears to be a swirling flux of phenomena 
like water running under a bridge. People and objects around 
us which appeared so real become mere phantoms in the panorama 
which is passing before us. We seem to be standing in a void and 
the horror of loneliness unspeakable engulfs us. 

What do we do when this realization comes to us accidentally 
or as a result of deep and continuous pondering over the real 
nature of phenomenal life ? We generally get alarmed, terrified 
and try to shut it out again by plunging more violently into the 
activities and interests of the worldly life, even though we theoretic- 
ally continue to believe in the unreality of the things around us. 
But ; if we do not try to smother this horrible vision, and facing it 
squarely, take to the self-discipline prescribed in Toga, then sooner 
or later, beneath this fast flowing stream of phenomena, we begin, 
first to sense, and later to discern something which is abiding, 
which transcends change and gives us an eternal foothold. We 
begin to realize that the phenomena change but not That in which 
the phenomena take place. First only dimly but later in its 
fullness this realization of the Eternal grows within us. But we 
ha j to pass through the valley of fear before this realization 
comes. We must see the whole solid world of men and things 
disintegrate and disappear into a flux of mere phenomena before 
we can see the Real hidden beneath the unreal. 

It is only when we have passed through this kind of experi- 
ence that we see with sadness the illusion arid the pathos in the 
life of the world, in the pursuit of little pleasures and ambitions, 
in the ephemeral love and happiness to which people desperately 
cling, in the short-lived glory of the man in power, in the effort to 
hold tenaciously to things which must be given up sooner or later. 
Viewed in this light even the most exquisite pleasures and splendid 
achievements of life pale into insignificance, nay assume the form 
of misery. It is the usual practice to ask a man under sentence 



SADHANA PADA 



165 



of death to name any simple pleasure which he would like to 
indulge in before he is executed, a drink, a dish Which he likes. 
But those who see such a man satisfying his whim for the last 
time are conscious of a peculiar pathos in this desire to clutch 
at pleasure before death snuffs out the life of the individual. To 
the man in whom Viveka has been developed the pathetic pursuit 
of pleasures, ambitions and the like appears in a similar light. 
We are all under sentence of death in a way, only we are not 
conscious of this fact and do not know when that sentence will be 
carried out. If we did, all our so-called pleasures will cease to 
be pleasures. 

Tdpa: The second affliction which is inherent- in human life 
is Tdpa or anxiety. All pleasures, indulgences and the so-called 
happiness are associated with anxiety, conscious or sub-conscious. 
For indulgence in pleasure, or dependence for our happiness on 
the uncertain and passing things in the outer world owing to 
attachment, means fear of losing those objects which give us 
pleasure or happiness. If we have money then there is always the 
fear that the money may be lost and our security may be 
threatened. If we love people then there is the fear that those 
people may die or may be taken away from us. Most of us have 
such fears and anxieties gnawing at our heart constantly though 
we may not acknowledge or be even conscious of this fact. It is 
only when a crisis comes in our life that these fears emerge into 
our consciousness but they are always present in the sub-conscious 
mind and secretly poison our life. We may be too dull to notice 
them or too ' strong ' mentally to allow them to worry us markedly 
but there is hardly any person not following the path of Toga who 
is above them. 

Samskara: This word means impression but in the present 
context it can best be translated by the word * habituation ' as we 
shall see presently. There is a law of Nature according to which 
any experience through which we pass produces an impression on 
all our vehicles. The impression thus produced makes a channel 
for the flow of a corresponding force and the channel thus becomes 
deeper and deeper as the experience is repeated. This results in our 
acquiring habits of various kinds and getting used to particular kinds 
of environment, modes of living and pleasures. But there is at work 



166 



SECTION II (15) 



simultaneously, the law of change, referred to already, which is 
constantly changing our outer environment and places us among 
new surroundings, circumstances and people. The result of this 
simultaneous action of two natural forces is that we are constantly 
acquiring new habits, getting used to new circumstances and also 
being forced out of them. No sooner do we settle "down in a new 
habit or a new environment than we are forced out of it, some- 
times easily and gradually, at other times roughly and suddenly. 
This continuous necessity for adjustment in life is a source of 
constant discomfort and pain to every individual. Nature hardly 
allows us breathing time and is continuously driving us into new 
kinds of experiences, much as we would like to settle down in our 
grooves and comfortable positions which we have gained. Of 
course, the intelligent man accepts this necessity for adjustment 
and does what he can to reconcile himself to it but the fact remains 
that this is a major affliction of life from which everyone would 
like to be free. 

Guna-Vrtti-Virodha: The word Vrtti is sometimes taken to refer 
to the Gunas and to mean the modifications or functions of the 
Gunas. According to this interpretation Guna-Vrtti-Virodha would 
be the opposition or conflict between the functioning of the three 
Gunas amongst themselves. As this does not make much sense it 
is much better to interpret Vrtti as referring to the states of the 
mind. Guna-Vrtti-Virodha would then mean the conflict between 
the naturai tendencies caused by the preponderance of one of the 
Gunas and the states of the mind which are constantly changing. 
Such a conflict is very common in human life and is the cause of 
much dissatisfaction in the life of the average individual. The 
following example will illustrate this conflict and show how it is 
one of the major causes of human misery. 

There is a man who is lazy by temperament owing to the 
predominance of Tamas in his nature. He hates activity but is 
placed in circumstances where he has to exert himself for his 
living. So he desires constantly a peaceful and inactive life and 
the result of this strong desire entertained persistently is that in his 
next life his desire finds fruition in an environment where he is 
forced to be quite inactive (he may be born as an Eskimo or be 
placed in charge of a lighthouse). But in this life there may be a 



sAdhana pada 



167 



preponderance of Rajas in his nature and he therefore wants 
activity in an environment where not much activity is possible. 
He, therefore, frets and is as dissatisfied with his new lot as he was 
with the old. Sometimes, this conflict between the Gunas prevailing 
at the time and the state of the mind Or desire is of a temporary 
nature but it always has the effect of producing discontentment 
for the time being. 

Thus, Nature, by the natural operation of its laws is bringing 
about constantly these oppositions between our tendencies and the 
states of our mind and this is why we see everywhere general 
discontentment. Nobody seems to be satisfied with his lot or 
circumstances. Everybody wants what he has not got. That is 
how Guna-Vrtti-Virodha becomes one of the causes of human misery 
in general. The wise man sees the inevitability of all this and 
therefore renounces desires altogether, taking what comes to him 
in life without elation or resentment. What we should remember 
in this connection is that every set of circumstances in which we 
find ourselves is the outcome of our own desires, although by the 
time a particular desire finds fruition it may have been replaced 
by another desire of an opposite kind. Our desires cannot by the 
very nature of things find immediate fulfilment and there mu"t be 
a certain time lag in their realization. During this intervening 
period our nature, temperament and desires may undergo consi- 
derable change and when we face the fulfilment of our own desire 
we may hardly believe that we ourselves desired what has now 
come to us. 

The existence of the four kinds of afflictions mentioned above 
which are inherent in human life produces such conditions that 
nobody who has developed Viveka or spiritual discrimination can 
possibly consider the so-called happiness of ordinary life as real 
happiness. It is true that to the man of the world immersed in 
its illusory pursuits of pleasure or power life may appear to consist 
of a mixture of pleasures and pains, joys and sorrows but to the 
wise man whose spiritual faculties have become awakened all life 
must appear full of misery and its illusory happiness merely, a 
sugar-coated pill containing only pain and suffering hidden inside. 
This is a statement which may appear to give a distorted view of 
life but let the student ponder deeply over these facts — -these hard 



168 



SECTION II (15, 16) 



facts of life — and it is probable that he will also come to the same 
conclusion. Anyway, unless the aspirant for the Yogic life realizes 
the truth enshrined in this Sutra he is not really fully qualified to 
attempt the long and difficult climb which leads to the mountain- 
top of Self-realization, 



Heyam duhkham anagatam. 

^HT to be avoided 5:^T misery 3HFRFT not yet come; in 
future. 

16. The misery which is not yet come can arid is 
to be avoided. 

The next question which naturally arises is whether it is 
possible to avoid this misery which has been shown to be inherent 
in human life in the last Sutra. A large number of thoughtful 
people who have pondered deeply over this problem will perhaps 
concede' that life is essentially an unalloyed misery but they will 
say that one has to take life as it is and to make the best of it 
since there is no way of getting out of it except through the gate- 
way of death. They may not believe like the ordinary orthodox 
religious man that all the sorrows and sufferings will somehow be 
compensated in the life after death but they do not see what 
can be done in the matter except to accept thankfully the little 
pleasures and to bear the pains with stoic indifference. 

Now, it is in this respect that the philosophy of Yoga differs 
fundamentally from most of the orthodox religions of the world 
which offer nothing better than an uncertain and nebulous 
happiness in the life after death. They say in effect ' Lead a good 
life to ensure happiness after death, put your faith in God and 
hope for the best '. According to Yogic philosophy death no more 
solves your spiritual problem than night solves your economic 
problem. If you are poor you do not expect on going to bed that 
your economic problem will be automatically solved next day. 



SADHANA PADA 



169 



You will have to get up next day and begin where you left off the 
previous night. If you are poor economically you do not expect 
to get rich overnight and if you are poor spiritually, bound by 
illusions and limitations of all kinds, you cannot expect to become 
Enlightened in your next life, or if you do not believe in reincar- 
nation, in the vague and unending life which is supposed to follow 
death. 

According to the Yogic philosophy it is possible to rise com- 
pletely above the illusions and miseries of life and to gain infinite 
knowledge, bliss and power through Enlightenment here and now 
while we are still living in the physical body. And if we do not 
attain this Enlightenment while we are still alive we will have to 
come back again and again into this world until we have accom- 
plished this appointed task. So it is not a question of choosing 
the path of Yoga or rejecting it. It is a question of choosing it 
now or in some future life. It is a question of gaining Enlighten- 
ment as soon as possible and avoiding the suffering in the future 
or postponing the effort and going through further suffering which 
is unnecessary and avoidable. This is the meaning of 11-16. No 
vague promise of an uncertain post-mortem happiness is this, but a 
definite scientific assertion of a fact verified by the experience of 
innumerable Yogis, saints and sages who have trodden the path of 
Yoga throughout the ages. 

Drastr-drsyayoh samyogo heya-hetuh. 

5*3 (of) Seer; (Purusa) <HHii\: (and) Seen; Prakrti wrft: 
union; association ^T (of) that which is to be avoided f^: cause. 

17. The cause of that which is to be avoided is 
the union of the Seer and the Seen. 



Now we come to the question of means, not the actual techni- 
que of Yoga which has to be employed but the general principle 
on which the freedom from the Klesas has to be worked out. It is 



170 



SECTION II (17) 



SADHANA PADA 



171 



to be noted that the objective is not a temporary and partial 
solution of the problem but a permanent and complete solution, 
not a palliative but a remedy which will root out the disease 
altogether. If the disease is to be rooted out we must go to the 
root-cause of the malady and not bother about the mere outward 
superficial symptoms. What is the root-cause of the misery 
which is caused by the Klesas and which is to be avoided? The 
answer is given in 11-17. The nature of the Seer and Seen and 
the reason why they are yoked together are explained in the 
subsequent Sutras but before dealing with those questions let us 
try to understand the problem in a general way. 

It has already been pointed out in dealing with the nature of 
Asmitd or the tendency of consciousness to identify itself with its 
vehicles that this process begins with the coming together of con- 
sciousness and matter as a result of the veil of Maya involving it in 
illusion and consequent Avidya. This problem which is linked with 
the origin of things and takes us back to the question of the initial 
involution of the individual consciousness in matter is really one of 
the ultimate problems of philosophy aboutwhich philosophers have 
been speculating since the beginning of time. It is like all such 
problems beyond the scope of the limited intellect and it is no use 
trying to solve it through the agency of the intellect. It can be 
solved — or it would perhaps be better to use the word dissolved — ■ 
only in the light of the transcendent knowledge we can gain in 
Enlightenment. So let us not try to answer the question why the 
Purusa who is pure and perfect is yoked to Prakrti. Let us hold our 
soul in patience and wait till we have transcended the intellect 
and its illusions and are face to face with that Reality which holds 
within itself the answer to this ultimate question. 

But though we cannot know the answer to this fundamental 
question there is no difficulty in understanding that such yoking 
together has taken place and also that this yoking is the cause of 
the bondage. Yoking always means bondage even in ordinary 
life and that it should be the cause of bondage in the case of the 
Purusa is quite conceivable. But what is the nature of the bondage 
it is impossible to conceive beyond what is given in the philosophy 
of Kletos. To know that in the real sense of the term would be 
to know the ultimate mystery of life and to have reached 



Enlightenment already. Surely, that is the end — what the aspirant 
sets out to achieve through Toga. 

After pointing out the cause of bondage in 11-17, namely the 
yoking together of the Seer and the Seen or the entanglement of 
pure consciousness in matter, Patailjali proceeds to explain the 
essential nature of the Seer and the Seen. In the two following 
Sutras, 11-18 and 19, he has put in a nutshell all the essential facts 
which concern the phenomenal world and thus given us a masterly 
analysis of the Seen. 



<\^. M<M4lft>4|lfr4RltiW 



sfFTTWTW 






Prakasa-kriya-sthiti-sllam bhutendriyat- 
iriakam bhogapavargartham drsyam. 

3PPTCT (of) luminosity; light; cognition; consciousness of 
fasTT activity fcqfcf (and) steadiness; stability sftef having the 
properties or qualities ?|?r elements ^frS*T sense-organs 3nc*ii> 
being of the nature sft*T experience 3JWT and liberation apf for 
the sake of; with the purpose of fS^ (is) the Seen {Prakrti). 

18. The Seen (objective side of manifestation) 
consists of the elements and sense-organs, is of the 
nature of cognition, activity and stability (Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamos) and has for its purpose (providing the 
Purusa with) experience and liberation. 

In 11-18 we see how the master minds who developed the 
science of Yoga had the capacity to go to the heart of every 
matter and after separating the essential from the non-essential 
could grasp and formulate the essential facts. In one brief Sutra 
Patanjali has analysed and placed before us the fundamental facts 
concerning the essential nature of the phenomenal world and its 
perception and purpose. First, he gives the essential nature of all 



£ 



172 



SECTION n (18) 



phenomena which are the objects of perception. These according 
to the well-known conception of Hindu philosophy are really made 
up of the three Gunas the nature of which will be explained later 
on. He then points out that the perception of the phenomenal 
world is really the result of the interactions of the Bhutan and 
Indriyas, the ' elements ' and the ' sense-organs \ And lastly, he 
points out the purpose and function of the phenomenal world 
which is twofold. Firstly, to provide experience for the Purusas 
who seem to be evolving in it, and secondly, through this experience 
to lead them gradually to emancipation and Enlightenment. 

It is necessary to note that the word used for the phenomenal 
world is Driyam, that which is ' seen ' or is capable of being ' seen '. 
The contact of Purusa and Prakrti results in the emergence of a 
duality which in modern language may be called the subjective 
and objective sides of Nature. Of these the Purusa is the essence 
or substratum of the subjective and Prakrti that of the objective 
side of this duality. As consciousness recedes inwards the dividing 
line between the subjective and objective shifts continually but 
the relation between the two remains the same. The Purusa with 
all the vehicles which have not been separated off from his con- 
sciousness constitutes the subjective part of this dual relationship 
and is called Drasfd or Seer. That portion of Prakrti which has 
been separated off in this manner constitutes the objective part 
and is called Driyam or Seen. Both Drasfd and Driyam are thus 
necessary for the phenomenal world. 

Let us first consider the essential nature of all phenomena 
which are the objects of perception. These, according to the 
present Sutra, are the result of the play of the three Gunas which 
find expression through cognition, activity and stability. The 
theory of Gunas forms an integral part of Hindu philosophy and 
the whole structure of the manifested Universe, according to this 
philosophy, is considered to rest on these three fundamental 
qualities or attributes of Prakrti. In fact, according to the Sdmkhya 
doctrine even Prakrti is nothing but a condition of perfect equili- 
brium of the three Gunas — Triguna-Sdmydvasthd. 

Although the theory of Gunas is one of the fundamental 
doctrines of Hindu philosophy it is surprising how little it is under- 
stood. The Gunas are referred to over and over again in the 



SADHANA PADA 



173 



Bhagavad-gitd; there is hardly any important book in Samskrta 
dealing with religion or philosophy in which the word Triguna 
does not occur; and yet, nobody seems to know what the three 
Gunas really stand for. There is a vague idea that they have 
something to do with properties because the word Guna in Samskrta 
generally means a property or attribute. That is also the general 
impression which the various contexts in which the word is used 
seem to produce. But one looks in vain for any clear exposition 
of the real significance of the word or what it really stands for in 
terms of modern thought. 

It is not difficult to understand why the nature of the Gunas 
is so difficult to comprehend. They lie at the very basis of the 
manifested world and even the working of the mind through 
which we try to comprehend their nature depends upon their 
interplay. Trying to comprehend the nature of the Gunas with 
the help of the mind is like trying to catch the hand with a pair of 
tongs held by the hand. Not until the Yogi crosses the boundary 
of manifestation and transcends the domain of the Gunas as indi- 
cated in IV-34 can he realize their true nature. But this does not 
mean that the student of Toga cannot understand their nature at 
all and should remain satisfied with the vague and nebulous 
notions which are generally prevalent with regard to this basic 
doctrine. The advances which have taken place in the field of 
physical sciences and the light which this has thrown on the 
structure of matter and the nature of physical phenomena has 
now placed us in a position to be able to gain a faint glimpse into 
the essential nature of the Gunas. It is true that this knowledge 
is connected with the superficial aspects of the Gunas but the 
student can, by the exercise of deep thought and intuition, gain 
some understanding of the subject, enough to convince him 
that the Gunas are not a mere elusive phantom of philosophy but 
are part of that profound mystery which surrounds the founding 
of a manifested Universe. This is not the place to deal exhaustively 
with this interesting but abstruse subject but a few ideas may be 
discussed to enable the student to know in which direction he 
should seek for more knowledge if he wants to understand the 
subject more fully. This discussion will involve some knowledge 
of modern scientific ideas though an effort will be made to keep 



174 



section n (18) 



it as free from technicalities as possible. After all, if we want to 
understand any problem in terms of modern scientific facts we 
must have at least a general knowledge of those facts. 

What is the essential nature of the phenomena which we 
perceive through the instrumentality of the sense-organs? The 
first point we should note in arriving at an answer to this question 
is that an object of perception will be found on analysis to consist 
of a number of properties or Dharmas cognized through the sense- 
organs. That every object is merely a bundle of properties and 
our knowledge with regard to that object is confined to the direct 
or indirect observation of these properties is a well-known philo- 
sophical conception which.every. student can understand. 

The second question which arises is: What is the nature of 
these properties or rather on. what does the cognition of these 
properties depend? If we analyse the. flux of physical phenomena 
around us in the light of modern Scientific knowledge we shall find 
three principles of a fundamental character underlying these 
phenomena. These three principles which ultimately determine 
the nature of every phenomenon are all connected with motion 
and may be called different aspects of motion. It is very difficult 
to express these principles by means of single words, for no words 
with a sufficiently comprehensive meaning are known, but for 
want of better words we may call them: (1) vibration which 
involves rhythmic motion of particles, (2) mobility which involves 
non-rhythmic motion of particles with transference of energy 
(3) inertia which involves relative position of particles These 
principles are really the three fundamental aspects of motion and 
may be crudely illustrated respectively by a number of soldiers 
drilling on a parade ground, a number of people walking in a 
crowd and a number of prisoners confined in separate cells 
Whatever the nature of the phenomenon, we shall find at the 
basis of that phenomenon these principles working in various ways 
and determining the Dharmas or properties which are manifest 

Let us take for the sake of illustration, one by one the 
sensuous phenomena which are observed through the five sense 
organs. The cognition of visual phenomena depends upon the 
presence of light vibrations which by their action on the retina 
of the eye give the impression of form and colour. Auditory 



SADHANA PADA 



175 



phenomena depend upon sound vibrations which acting upon the 
drum of the ear produce the sensation of sound. The sensation of 
heat, etc., depends upon the impact of moving atoms and molecules 
on the skin. The sensations of taste and smell depend upon the 
action of chemical substances on the membranes of the palate and 
nose, the nature of the chemical substance (which is determined 
by the relative position and the nature of the atoms in the mole- 
cules) determining the sensation which is experienced. In every 
case we find vibration or rhythmic motion, mobility or irregular 
motion, inertia or relative position at work and determining the 
nature of the sensuous phenomenon. 

Up to this time we have assumed the presence of particles 
which by their motion determine the phenomenon. But what are 
these particles ? Science tells us that these particles are also nothing 
but combinations of protons, neutrons and electrons, the electrons 
whirling round the nucleus of protons and neutrons at tremendous 
speeds and determining the properties of the atoms. In view of the 
discovery of the equivalence and interconvertibility of mass and 
energy it will probably be found ultimately that the nucleus of the 
atom is also an expression of energy and that the ultimate basis 
of the manifested physical universe is nothing but motion or 
energy. The day this is proved conclusively materialism of the 
orthodox type will be buried for ever and the philosophy of Toga 
will be fully vindicated. 

We see, therefore, that all properties can be reduced to their 
simplest elements — wave motion (Prakdsa), action (Kriya) and 
position (Stkiti) at least as far as the physical universe is concerned 
and since these are also the ideas associated with the nature of the 
three Gunas, Science has to a certain extent corroborated the 
theory of Gunas. It is true that the Gunas underlie the whole 
manifested Universe and not only the physical world, and so we 
cannot comprehend their true nature by simply taking into account 
their physical manifestations. But a study of their interplay in 
the physical world may help the student to gain a faint glimpse 
into their real nature and the truth underlying IV-13. 

There is one other important point we have to understand in 
relation to the Gunas if we would grasp the significance of ideas 
given in 111-56 and IV-34. This point is connected with the 



176 



section n (18) 



relation of the three Gunas to one another. Every student of 
elementary Science knows that wave motion or vibration is a 
harmonious combination of mobility and inertia. And if the three 
Gunas are connected as we have seen with these three aspects of 
motion it follows that Sattva is merely a harmonious combination 
of Rajas and Tamas and is not anything apart from Rajas and 
Tamas. So the development of Sattva is not really the creation of 
something new but the harmonization of the existing Rajas and 
Tamas. This fact is very important because it serves to throw 
some light on the relation of the Purusa and Sattva. When the 
Purusa comes in contact with Prakrti at the beginning of the evo- 
lutionary cycle his contact disturbs the equilibrium of the three 
Gunas and gradually brings into play the forces of Prakrti. Through 
this disturbed atmosphere the Purusa cannot see his Svarupa because 
this Svarupa can be expressed or reflected only through a suffi- 
ciently purified Sattva Guna. In the early stages of evolution this 
question does not arise. The vehicles of consciousness are slowly 
being organized and the powers latent in Prakrti are being un- 
folded. But after evolution has reached a sufficiently advanced 
stage and the desire for Self-realization is born within the soul 
Rajas and Tamas have to be replaced gradually by Sattva. So the 
object in Toga is to harmonize Rajas and Tamas into Sattva. And 
as it is the harmonization of two opposites, a perfect harmonization 
means really the virtual disappearance of the opposites and the 
attainment of a condition which is free from the opposites. 

The question now arises ' Is the Triguna-Samyavasthd before the 
Purusa came in contact with Prakrti exactly the same as the condi- 
tion of pure Sattva developed after going through the evolutionary 
cycle and attaining Kaivalya ? ' The answer to this question must be 
in the negative. Because, if the two conditions were the same the 
whole purpose of evolution as outlined in 11-23 would be defeated. 
It would really amount to supposing that the Purusa descends into 
matter, goes through the long and tedious evolutionary cycle and 
then again lapses into the condition from which he started. 

If the two conditions are not identical, what is the difference 
between them? This is not the place to enter into this highly 
philosophical question but an analogy from the field of Science 
may serve to throw some light on the nature of the difference. A 



SADHANA PADA 



177 



condition of equilibrium may be of two kinds which we may for 
ihe sake of convenience call static and dynamic. In static equili- 
brium two equal and opposite things combine in such a manner 
that the combination is a dead thing. You cannot get anything 
out of the combination because it does not contain potentially any 
power. If we mix together equivalent quantities of an acid and 
a base— two opposites — we get a neutral salt from which we can- 
not get anything else. On the other hand it is possible to produce 
a harmonious equilibrium of two equal and opposite things which 
is dynamic and contains potential power. Take a storage battery. 
In it lie two opposite kinds of electricity combined equally and 
harmoniously. Outwardly, the battery also appears a dead or 
inert thing. But only outwardly. We have only to connect the 
two poles to see the difference. 

Now, the equilibrium of Sattva is something analogous to this 
equilibrium in a storage battery. It contains potentially the power 
to produce any combination of the Gunas as required and yet 
reverting instantaneously to the original condition when the power 
is not needed. It is in this sense that the recession of the Gunas 
to their origin in IV-34 should be understood. The Gunas do not 
cease to function permanently for the Self-realized Purusa. They 
cease to function when he withdraws into himself and come into 
play as soon as he projects his consciousness outwards. In short, 
they lose their independent activity and become merely his 
instruments. 

This conception of the Gundtita state not only imparts a new 
significance to the evolutionary cycle but is also in accordance 
with facts as known to Occultism. The mighty Adepts of Toga 
who emerge as Jivanmuktas from the evolutionary cycle do not 
merge into God and become indistinguishable from Him by losing 
their identity for ever. They become free from the domination of 
the Gunas and the illusion of Prakrti and yet retain all the knowl- 
edge and powers which they have acquired through evolution. 
Of all the misconceptions and partially understood truths of Hindu 
philosophy perhaps none is more absurd and a travesty of the real 
facts than this idea of Purusa merging completely with God and 
being lost in Him for ever. If a human being were to erect a 
house and then demolish it as soOn as it was completed we should 
12 



178 



SECTION II (18) 



consider him mad. But we attribute to God a worse kind of 
irrationality in believing that on the attainment of Jivanmukti, 
Jivdttnd merges with the Paramdtmd and is lost for ever. 

Having considered the nature of the material basis of the 
phenomenal world let us now pass on to the second generalization 
contained in the Sutra which gives the modus operandi of the per- 
ception of this world. How is this world which is the result of the 
interplay of the Gunas perceived? What are the basic elements 
involved in this perception? The answer to this question again is 
contained in a generalization which is a masterpiece of analytic 
technique. According to Togic philosophy there are only two 
factors involved in perception — the Bhutas and the Indriyas. What 
these Bhutas and Indriyas are and how, by their interaction, they 
produce an awareness of the external world in the consciousness 
of the Purusa has been explained to some extent in discussing 
111-45 and 111-48. We need not therefore enter into this question 
here but there is one important fact which may be pointed out 
before we pass on to the third generalization of the Sutr,a. The 
words Bhutas and Indriyas are used in the widest sense of these 
terms and have reference to the physical as well as the super- 
physical planes. The mechanism through which consciousness 
becomes aware of objects differs from plane to plane, but the 
modus operandi of this mechanism on every plane is essentially the 
same, namely the interaction of the Bhutas and the Indriyas. Not 
only is the modus operandi the same on all the planes but the five 
states of the Bhutas and Indriyas referred to in 111-45 and 111-48 
are also the same on all the planes. Satnyama on these states 
will therefore lead to the mastery of the Bhutas and the Indriyas 
on all the planes. 

The third generalization in this Sutra gives the purpose of the 
phenomenal world. This is to provide experience and ultimately 
liberation for the Purusa. It is in some way, which is not quite 
comprehensible to the intellect, necessary for the Purusa to descend 
into matter and pass through the evolutionary process before he 
can become perfect and free from the domination of matter. The 
phenomenal world provides for him the necessary experiences 
through which alone evolution of his vehicles and unfolding of his 
consciousness can take place. As the seed after being sown absorbs 



SADHANA PADA 



179 



the necessary nourishment from its environment and gradually 
develops into a full-grown tree after the likeness of its progenitor, 
in the same way, the germ of Divine Life when it is put in the 
phenomenal world is acted upon by all kinds of stimuli and 
influences and gradually unfolds the Divine Life and powers which 
are hidden within it. As this idea has been discussed fully later, 
in connection with II -23, we shall not consider it here. 

The Togic idea that the phenomenal world definitely exists 
for the growth and perfection of the individual centres of conscious- 
ness is in refreshing contrast to the bleak and vain speculations 
of modern Science on the origin and purpose of this manifested 
Universe. The idea that this wonderfully and beautifully designed 
Universe in which we live has no purpose, is really an insult to 
human intelligence and yet it is tacitly accepted by the large 
majority of modern scientists or the so-called intellectuals. If you 
ask the average scientist what he has to say about the purpose 
behind the Universe he will most probably show his impatience 
and reply that he does not know and does not care to know. He 
has very conveniently put aside the question of ' why ' of the 
Universe so that he may be able to devote himself to the ' how ' 
without being pestered by any uncomfortable doubts with regard 
to the utility of what he is doing. The most convenient way of 
avoiding your pursuers is to shut your eyes and forget about them. 

<\ $.. Pwqift4lqfo^*jidifVi<!fifH ^iH^YPm i 

Visesavisesa-lingamatralingani guna- 
parvani. 

fkm particular ; specific 3T^w non-specific ; archetypal ; uni- 
versal fci^i* a mere mark 3fc|<$lPi (and) without mark or 
differentiating characteristic JPT (of) the Gunas mtft> l stages 
of development; states. 



19. The stages of the Gunas are the particular, the 
universal, the differentiated and the undifferentiated. 



180 



SECTION II (19) 



The natuve of the three Gunas which was indicated in the last 
Sutra is further elaborated in this Sutra. The Gunas, according to 
this Sutra, have four states or stages of development corresponding 
to the four stages of Samprqjnata Samadhi mentioned "in 1-17. As 
consciousness and matter work together in the phenomenal world 
it is to be expected that the expression of the deeper layers of 
consciousness should require a subtler form of the three Gunas. 
The essential nature of the Gunas remains the same but they 
undergo a kind of subt lization, matching, as it were, each of these 
deeper or finer states of consciousness and enabling these to be 
expressed through matter. An illustration from the field of Science 
will perhaps enable the student to understand this relation between 
the states of consciousness and the stages of the Gunas. Sound can 
be transmitted through a comparatively heavy medium like air 
but light, which is a much finer vibration, requires for its trans- 
mission a subtler medium like the ether. 

As the states of consciousness which the Yogi has to pass 
through in Samadhi before he is released from the domination of 
the Gunas are four, there should naturally be four stages of the 
Gunas. While it is easy to understand why there should be four 
stages, still, when we come to the nature of these stages as defined 
in the present Sutra, we find some difficulty in grasping the subtle 
gnificance of the words used for these stages. Since these stages 



si 



correspond to the four stages of the unfoldment of consciousness 
in Samadhi, let us see whether we can find some help in studying 
these correspondences. 

The characteristics of the four states of consciousness, the 
stages of the Gunas and the vehicles through which these states of 
consciousness find expression are shown in the following table: 



Characteristics of the 
states of consciousness 

Vitarka 
Vicara 
Ananda 
Asmita 



Stages of the 
Gunas 



Visesa 
Avi£esa 
Linga 
Alinga 



Vehicle for expression 
inVedantic terminology 



Manomaya Kosa 
Vijnanamaya Kosa 
Anandamaya Kos"a 
Atma 



SADHANA PADA 



181 



The four stages of Samprajndta Samadhi have already been 
discussed in dealing with 1-17 and it has been shown that these 
stages correspond to the functioning of consciousness through the 
four vehicles as shown above. When the stages of the Gunas are 
studied in the light of these correspondences the meanings of the 
words which are used to denote these stages become clear to some 
extent though it is impossible to grasp their full significance on 
account of the limitations of the intellect and the physical brain. 
Let us do the best we can under our present limitations. 

The word Vis"esa means particular and the Visesa stage of the 
Gunas obviously refers to the stage of the lower mind which sees all 
objects only as particular things with names and forms. To the 
lower mind every object seems to have a separate and independent 
existence and a separate identity. It is isolated, seen apart from its 
archetype and from the Divine consciousness of which it is a part 
and in which it is embedded, as it were. This stage of the Gunas 
corresponds to the Vitarka stage of Samadhi because while consci- 
ousness is functioning through the lower mind Vitarka is its most 
important and essential function. Vitarka is that activity of the 
lower mind through which it differentiates a particular object from 
all others. How do we differentiate a particular dog, for example, 
from all other objects in the phenomenal world? The mental 
process may be illustrated by the following line of reasoning. A 
particular dog, say Bonzo, is a living animal. This differentiates 
it from all inanimate objects. Bonzo is an animal of the canine 
species. This differentiates it from all other species. Bonzo is a 
fox-terrier. This differentiates it from dogs of other breeds. We 
can in this way narrow down the range of objects from which 
Bonzo has still to be differentiated until we come down to the last 
stage when the object has been completely isolated in the mind 
and stands apart as a particular object in the Universe different 
and distinguishable from all other objects. This isolation or 
differentiation of a particular object which is illustrated by the 
crude example given above is called Vitarka and it is through 
such a process that the first stage of Samadhi is reached. The 
student will also see from the above the significance of the word 
Visesa, particular, in indicating the first or crudest stage of 
the Gunas. 



182 



SECTION II (19) 



Then we come to the next stage AviJesa which means uni- 
versal or non-specific. This corresponds to the activity of the 
higher mind whose function is to deal with universals, archetypes 
and principles which underlie the world of names and forms. The 
lower mind deals with particular objects with names and forms, 
the higher mind with abstract ideas and archetypes. Reverting 
to the previous illustration we saw that Bonzo was a particular dog 
of a particular breed. But what is this thing ' dog ' of which Bonzo 
is a particular representative? The word 'dog' stands for an 
abstract idea. From observation of a large number of dogs we 
isolate all the characteristics which constitute their ' doghood ' 
and combine them in a single concept which we denote by the 
word ' dog '. Every common noun is such an abstraction although 
we are hardly aware of this fact when we use such words. The 
mental process whereby these qualities are isolated from particular 
objects and combined in a single abstract concept is called Vicdra. 
The function of the higher mind is to form such universal concepts 
and to grasp their inner significance. It should be noted here 
that while Vitarka isolates a particular object from all the rest 
Vicdra isolates a particular concept, archetype, law, or universal 
principle from all such Suksma Visqyas referred to in 1-44. This 
stage in which consciousness is functioning through the higher 
mind corresponds to the Vicdra stage of SamprajHdta Samddhi and 
the Aviiesa stage of the Gunas. The justification for using the word 
Avifesa, universal, for this second stage of the Gunas will be seen, 
to a certain extent, from what has been said above. 

It may be pointed out here that the simple mental process of 
Vitarka or Vicdra which we may engage in during the course of 
our studies and thinking should not be considered equivalent to 
the corresponding mental processes as they take place in the state 
of Samddhi. In the state of Samddhi the mind is completely isolated 
from the outer world, is fused, as it were, with the object in a state 
of abstraction. It is in a peculiar and to the ordinary man incom- 
prehensible state. And so, concrete and abstract thinking are 
merely faint reflections, qualitative representations of the extremely 
subtle mental processes Which take place in Samddhi. The reason 
why words like Vitarka and Vicdra are used to indicate these subtle 
mental processes lies in the fact that the ordinary reasoning 



SADHANA PADA 



183 



processes are familiar to the student and it is only in this way that 
he can get some idea of the subtler processes. From the known to 
the unknown is always the right method of advancing in the realm 
of the mind. 

Then we come to the next stage of the Gunas — Linga. This 
word means a mark which serves to identify, and in the present 
context Linga-mdtra means a state of consciousness in which partic- 
ular objects and even principles are mere marks or signs which 
serve to distinguish them from other objects. This stage of the 
Gunas corresponds to the supra-mental consciousness which trans- 
cends the intellect and is expressed through Buddhi or intuition. 
The corresponding stage in Samddhi is accompanied by Ananda 
which confirms the conclusion that this stage of the Gunas corres- 
ponds to the functioning of consciousness through the Buddhic 
vehicle or Anandamaya Kosa as it is called in Veddntic terminology. 
But why is this stage of the Gunas called Linga? Because in 
the corresponding state of consciousness all objects and universal 
principles become part of a universal consciousness. They are 
seen, embedded as it were, in one consciousness, as parts of an 
indivisible whole. But they still have their identity, are still 
distinguishable or recognizable. Each object is itself and yet part 
of a whole. It is a condition of unity in diversity. 

The nextand the last stage of the Gunas is called Alinga or with- 
out mark or differentiating characteristic. In this stage the objects 
and principles lose their separate identity. Consciousness becomes so 
predominant that they go out of focus, as it were. According to the 
highest conceptions of the Hindu philosophy all objects, archetypes, 
everything in the manifested Universe is a modification of conscious- 
ness — Brahma-Vrtti. In the Linga stage awareness of objects exists 
side by side with the awareness of consciousness. In the Alinga 
stage the former go out of focus and only awareness of the Divine 
consciousness of which they are modifications remains. A concrete 
example may perhaps help the student to understand the signi- 
ficance of the different stages of the Gunas. Suppose we have a 
number of objects made of gold — a ring, a bracelet and a necklace, 
placed on a table. We may see them merely as separate objects, 
as a child would see them. This corresponds to the Viiesa stage. 
We may see them as ornaments with a common function of serving 



184 



SECTION n (19) 



to adorn the human body, as a woman would see them. This is 
the Amiesa stage. We may see them as objects with a common 
decorative function but we may also be interested in the fact that 
they are made of gold, i.e., we see their common substratum and 
their separate identity simultaneously, as a goldsmith would see 
them. This corresponds to the Lihga stage. And lastly, we may 
see only the gold and may hardly be conscious of their separate 
identities or common function, as a thief would see them. This is 
analogous to the Alinga stage. In this stage the Togi is conscious, 
chiefly of the substratum of all phenomenal objects, particular or 
universal. He is aware predominantly of the Divine consciousness 
in which they are merely Vrttis or modifications. The objects as 
separate entities do exist but they have ceased to have any mean- 
ing for him. This stage of the Gunas corresponds to the last stage 
of SamprajHdta Samddhi of which Asmitd is the predominant char- 
acteristic. The consciousness of pure existence which is denoted 
by Asmitd swallows up the consciousness of objects. 

The progressive expansion of consciousness which takes place 
when it passes through the different stages of Samddhi does not 
mean that these states of consciousness are separated from each 
other by water-tight compartments and the lower aspects of objects 
disappear when the higher come into view. Many students-feel 
confused because they suffer from a common misconception about 
the functioning of consciousness in the higher worlds. They think, 
for example, that when the Togi passes into the world of the higher 
mind he lives solely in a world of abstract ideas, archetypes and 
principles with no objects having names and forms with which he 
has been familiar. Such a world of pure abstractions would be 
an impossible world to live in and does not exist anywhere as the 
experiences of all mystics and occultists testify. The higher always 
includes and enriches the lower though it also enables the lower 
to be seen in its correct perspective. What was considered im- 
portant may now appear unimportant or what was considered 
insignificant may now assume tremendous significance, and vice 
versa, but everything is there within the expanded consciousness, 
and the Togi does not therefore feel he has entered into a strange 
and incomprehensible world. On the other hand, every expansion 
of consciousness makes him see greater richness, beauty and 



SADHANA PADA 



185 



significance in everything which is within the range of his percep- 
tion. Expansion of consciousness means inclusion of more and 
more and exclusion of nothing. This fact is quite clear from what 
is stated in 111-50, 111-55, and IV-31. 

It will be seen that the four stages of the Gunas are denoted 
by the predominant nature of the mental perception and activity 
which characterize those stages. We are told how the changes 
in the Gunas affect the expression of consciousness through them 
but we are not given any indication as to the nature of the changes 
in the Gunas themselves. This kind of classification which is based 
upon the secondary effects of the changes in the Gunas does not, 
therefore, throw much further light on the nature of the Gunas 
themselves. Since the Gunas lie at the very basis of the manifested 
Universe and their roots are embedded in the deepest layers of 
consciousness their subtle nature can be realized only in Samddhi 
(IH-45). The intellect can, at best, enable us to gain only a 
general idea with regard to their nature and their gross expressions 
on the lowest plane. 

Drasta drsimatrah suddho 'pi pratyaya- 
nupasyah. 

3^T the Seer; Purusa <H!IHId: pure consciousness only; pure 
awareness only VTS pure 3rfa though SRipT concept; content of 
the mind 3HM¥4: appears to see along with. 

20. The Seer is pure consciousness but though 
pure, appears to see through the mind. 

After dealing with Drsyam or the objective side of the pheno- 
menal world in 11-18 and 19, Patanjali now tries to give us some 
idea with regard to the Dras(d or the Seer who is the basis of the 
subjective side of the phenomenal world. This is a comparatively 
more difficult task because the Purusa according to the Togic 
philosophy is the ultimate Reality hidden behind the phenomenal 



186 



SECTION II (20) 



SADHANA PADA 



187 



world in its subjective aspect. Although it is through him that 
the Prakrti is galvanized into life and cognition takes place, he 
always eludes us, because he is always behind the veil, the hidden 
witness of the objective through the subjective. If we take a 
powerful electric light and cover it up with a number of concentric 
semi-transparent and coloured globes, one within the other, the 
outermost globe will be illuminated in some measure by the light 
of the electric lamp. But though this illumination will be derived 
from the light of the electric lamp we will not be able to see the 
light of the electric lamp as it is, but only as it comes out after 
being filtered and dimmed by all the intervening globes. If we 
remove the outermost globe the next globe comes into view and 
the light becomes stronger and purer. But do we now see the light 
of the electric lamp? No! It is still hidden behind the remaining 
globes. As we remove globe after globe, the light becomes stronger 
and purer but we never see it in its purity and fullness as long as 
any globe remains covering the electric lamp. It is only when the 
last globe is removed that the pure light of the electric lamp in its 
total brilliance comes into view. Can the man who has never 
seen an electric lamp know by observing the outermost globe what 
the light of the electric lamp is like? Not until he has removed all 
the globes, one by one. 

The relation of the Purusa to the vehicles through which he 
manifests is similar. The light of his consciousness comes stream- 
ing through the complete set of vehicles, each vehicle removing, 
as it were, some of the constituents and decreasing its intensity, 
until in the physical body it is at its dullest and encumbered with 
the largest number of limitations. The only way to see the light 
of his pure consciousness is to separate off all the vehicles and see 
that light in its purity without the obscuration even of the subtlest 
vehicle as pointed out in IV-22. This is the isolation of pure 
consciousness (Kaioalya) involved in the attainment of Kaivalya, 
the ultimate goal of Togic life. 

The first point we should note in this Sutra is that the Seer 
who is the subjective element in the phenomenal world is pure 
consciousness and nothing else. The word Matrab of course means 
' only ' and is used to emphasize the necessity of not mistaking the 
Seer for any partial manifestation of his consciousness through a 



subtler vehicle. When consciousness withdraws, step by step, from 
the lower worlds in Samidhi and begins to function in the higher 
realms of the Spirit the change is so tremendous and the 
sudden influx of power, knowledge and bliss, on the progressive 
removal of limitations, is so overwhelming that one is apt to 
mistake this partial manifestation for the ultimate Reality. But 
the fact is that the consciousness is still encumbered by veils of 
matter, thin veils it is true, but veils all the same which impose 
certain limitations and illusions. Not until the last vehicle has 
been transcended can consciousness be known in its purity. That 
is the Purusa, the real Drasta. 

The second point to be noted is that though the Seer is pure' 
consciousness, and not consciousness as modified by the vehicles, 
still, when he manifests through a vehicle he seems to be lost in the 
Pratyaya which is present at the moment in the mind. Just as a 
mirror reflects or assumes the form of anything placed before it 
and seems to be that thing, in the same way the pure consciousness 
assumes, as it were, the form of the Pratyaya. and appears indis- 
tinguishable from the Pratyaya. Or, to take another example, 
when the pure light from the electric bulb in a cinematograph falls 
on the screen it assumes the form of the picture being projected, 
though in itself it is pure and quite distinct from the picture. 
Pratyaya, of course, as has been explained elsewhere, is the content 
of the mind when consciousness comes in contact with any vehicle 
and differs from vehicle to vehicle. 

Not only is the Pratyaya indistinguishable from consciousness 
but as a result of this mixing up of the two, the functions of the 
vehicles appear to be performed by the Purusa. Thus when abstract 
thinking is done through the higher mind is it the Purusa who does 
the thinking? No! The thinking is the function of the vehicle. The 
contact of consciousness with the vehicle sets it in motion and 
enables it to perform its respective function. When a magnet 
is thrust-into a coil of wire a current of electricity is produced in 
the wire. To a person who is ignorant of the facts the magnet 
appears to produce the current. As a matter of fact the magnet 
does not directly produce the Current though it is in a mysterious 
manner connected with the production of the current. If the 
whole mechanism for the production of the current is there and all 



188 



SECTION II (20, 21) 



the necessary conditions are provided then only the insertion of 
the magnet will make the mechanism work to produce the current. 
How the mere contact of Purusa with Prakrti galvanizes it into life 
and makes it perform its highly intelligent function is a problem 
which has been much debated by philosophers. To the practical 
student of Toga this question is not of much importance. He 
knows that all such theoretical questions can be solved only by 
direct knowledge. 



Tad-artha eva drsyasyatma. 

^T-f-3nr: (intended) for the sake of that (the Seer) xr$ alone 
\>tmM of the Seen {Prakrti) 3TRJTT (being) ; nature. 

21. The very being of the Seen is for his sake 
(i.e. Prakrti exists only for his sake). 

In the previous Sutras the essential natures of the Seer and: 
Seen have been pointed out, and it has been shown that even 
when they seem to be blended completely in their intimate 
relationship they are really quite distinct and separate from each 
other like oil and water in an emulsion. This Sutra points out 
that in this close association of Purusa and Prakrti, the latter plays 
a subordinate role, that of merely serving the Purusa. The purpose 
of the Seen has already been given in 11-18, namely providing 
experience and means of emancipation for the Purusa. The Sutra 
under discussion further clarifies this point and emphasizes that 
Prakrti exists only for subserving the purposes of the Purusa. It 
has no purpose of its own. The whole drama of creation is being 
played in order to provide experience for the growth and Self- 
realization of the Purusas who are involved in the show. 

Krtartham prati nastam apy anastam 
tad-anya-sadharanatvat. 



SADHANA PADA 



189 



tdl4 (one) whose purpose has been fulfilled srfa for; to 
Ht>dH destroyed; non-existent srft" although 3R^£*T not destroyed ; 
existent ^TcT (than) that 3psr to others tilfclKUMUj, on account 
of being common. 



22. Although it becomes non-existent for him 
whose purpose has been fulfilled it continues to exist 
for others on account of being common to others 
(besides him). 

This Sutra again deals with a purely theoretical problem of 
philosophy connected with the relationship existing between Purusa 
and Prakrti. If the purpose of Prakrti is to enable the Purusa to 
obtain Self-realization what happens to it when that purpose has 
been fulfilled? The answer given is that Prakrti ceases to exist as 
far as that Purusa is concerned. But what does this mean? Does 
Prakrti cease to exist altogether? Obviously not, because the other 
Purusas who have not attained Kaivalya still remain under its 
influence and continue to work for their emancipation. 

If Prakrti ceases to exist only for the Self-realized Purusa, then 
is it purely subjective in its nature or has it an independent 
existence of its own? The answer to this fundamental question 
differs according to different schools of thought which have tried 
to speculate about it. According to Vedanta even Prakrti, the 
substratum of the phenomenal world, is a purely subjective thingj 
the product of Maya. According to Samkhya which provides to a 
great extent the theoretical basis of the Togic philosophy Prakrti 
has an independent existence of its own. Purusa and Prakrti are 
the two ultimate, eternal and independent principles in existence. 
Purusas are many, Prakrti is one. The Purusas get involved in 
matter, go through the cycle of evolution under the fostering care 
of Prakrti, attain Self-realization and then pass out of the illusion 
and influence of Prakrti altogether. But Prakrti always remains 
the same. It will be seen that there is no real contradiction 
involved in these two views. Vedanta merely carries the process of 
idealization to a further stage which alone can be the ultimate 



190 



SECTION II (22) 



stage. In it the multiplicity of the Purusas on the one hand, and 
the duality of the Purusas and the Prakrti on the other, are inte- 
grated into a higher conception of the One Reality. 

It may be pointed out here that a system of philosophy how- 
ever lofty and true it may be should not be expected to give us 
an absolutely correct picture of the transcendent truths as they 
really exist. Because philosophy works through the medium of 
the intellect and the intellect has its inherent limitations, it 
cannot understand or formulate truths which are beyond its scope. 
So, in dealing in its own way with these realities of the spiritual 
life it can give us only partial and distorted interpretations of those 
realities. Contradictions, paradoxes and inconsistencies are inevit- 
able when we try to see and interpret these realities through the 
instrumentality of the intellect. We have to accept these limita- 
tions when we use the intellect as an instrument for understanding 
and discovering these truths in the initial stages. It is no use 
throwing away this instrument, poor and imperfect though it is, 
because it gives us at least some help in organizing our effort to 
know the truth in the only way in which it can be known — by 
Self-realization. If we want to know any country the only way 
to do it is to go and see it with our own eyes. But that does not 
mean that we should throw away the maps and plans which are 
meant to give us a rough idea with regard to the country. These 
do not give us true knowledge with regard to the country but 
they do help us in finding the country and seeing it directly 
with our own eyes. Philosophy, at its best, serves only this kind 
of purpose. Those who are content to take it as a substitute for 
the real truth blunder. Those who ignore it completely also make 
a mistake because they throw away a thing which might be 
usefully utilized in the attainment of their objective. The wise 
student of Yoga takes the various doctrines of philosophy and 
religion lightly, as tentative explanations and interpretations of 
truths beyond the realm of the intellect, but uses them as best as 
he can in his direct discovery of those truths. Yoga is an essentially 
practical science and the truths and experiences which it deals 
with are not dependent upon the particular philosophy or philo- 
sophies which are put forward to provide a rational picture of the 
objective and the various processes which lead to it. We do not 



SADHANA PADA 



191 



know really the nature of electricity. There are many theories. 
But that does not prevent us from utilizing this force for gaining 
our physical ends in thousand and one ways. In the same way 
the philosophy which provides the theoretical background of Yoga 
and its inadequacies does not affect materially the results which 
can be obtained by the practice of Yoga. Let us give philosophy 
its proper place in. the study of Yoga and not mix it up with the 
practical and scientific part of the subject. 

Sva-svami-saktyoh svarupopalabdhi-hetuh 
samyogah. 

^ (of) it (Prakrti) F^fa (and) of the master (Purusa) SR^it: 
of the (two) powers *^T own form; real or essential nature 
^u^fca r experiencing; knowledge t§: cause; reason; purpose 
qqW l : union; coming together. 

23. The purpose of the coming together of the 
Purusa and Prakrti is gaining by the Purusa of the 
awareness of his true nature and the unfoldment of 
powers inherent in him and Prakrti. 

It is generally thought that the idea of evolution is an entirely 
new contribution made by Science to modern civilization, and 
Darwin is considered to be the father of this idea. But as we 
often say there is nothing new under the Sun and the idea of 
evolution has come down to us in one form or another from the 
earliest times. It would be really surprising if the master minds 
who lived in the past and who had such a wonderful grasp of the 
essential realities of life had missed this important and all-pervading 
Law underlying the manifestation of life. It is perhaps true 
that this Law was not studied and presented in the detailed form 
as we have it now but then nothing pertaining to the phenomenal 
world which was not essential for real human happiness was 



192 



SECTION II (23) 



studied by them in great detail. It was thought sufficient to have 
a general idea of the fundamental principles. They never lost 
sight of the limitations of the intellect and probably did not 
consider it worthwhile wasting their time and energy on the 
accumulation of unnecessary details with regard to the general 
principles which at best could be understood very imperfectly 
through the medium of the illusion-bound intellect. It was 
thought that the energy which would be needed for gaining knowl- 
edge of the non-essential details had better be employed in un- 
ravelling the Great Mystery of Life itself, for when that mystery 
was unravelled all the problems of life were understood auto- 
matically and simultaneously and in a way they could never be 
understood by a process of intellectual analysis and reasoning. 

But while these adepts in the Science of Life did not think it 
worth their while descending to non-essential details with regard 
to the facts of the phenomenal worlds they tried and managed to 
get a wonderfully complete and true picture of the fundamental 
principles. It is this clear and firm grasp of the fundamental 
principles and laws which enabled them to put these principles 
and generalizations in the form of Sutras. What a modern writer 
would take a chapter or book to convey was condensed in a master- 
ly manner in a single Sutra. There are many examples of such 
condensed knowledge in the Toga-Sutras, and 11-23 which we shall 
now consider is a striking instance of this nature. In one Sutra 
Patafijali has put the essential and fundamental idea underlying 
the theory of Evolution and also managed to bring into his gener- 
alization the most important aspect of evolution which unfortun- 
ately is missing in the modern scientific theory. So absorbed 
are most of our modern scientists with details, so full of their own 
achievements, so obsessed by their materialistic outlook that they 
often miss the most important aspects of their researches, aspects 
which are under their very noses and which they could not fail to 
recognize if they were at all open-minded. The theory of Evolu- 
tion which we are now considering is a case in point. 

According to the modern theory, considered in a very general 
way, there is an evolutionary trend discernible in the bodies of 
plants and animals, and the bodies in their effort to adapt them- 
selves to their environment develop new powers and capacities. 



SADHANA PADA 



193 



Putting the idea in a different way we may say that the study of 
the form side of living creatures shows that these forms are steadily, 
though slowly, becoming more and more complex and capable of 
expressing the powers which are inherent in life. Life and form 
are always found together. The forms are found to evolve. What 
about the life? Modern Science does not know and what is more 
surprising does not care to know. For the idea that life evolves 
side by side with form is well known and is really complementary 
to the idea of the evolution of forms, which has been developed by 
Science. It is by combining this idea of the evolution of life with 
that of the evolution of forms that the theory of evolution becomes 
intelligible and its beauty and significance are revealed. The 
forms evolve to provide better vehicles for the evolving life. The 
mere evolution of forms would be a meaningless process in a 
* Universe in which all natural phenomena appear to be guided by 
intelligence and design. And yet modern Science is pursuing this 
idea of the evolution of forms and refusing to combine it with its 
complementary idea. No wonder it got bogged in a plethora 
of details in this field and missed the discovery of some basic facts 
of general and vital interest to humanity. 

11-23 answers the question ' Why is Purusa brought into con- 
tact with Prakrti? ' The answer is: To unfold the powers latent 
in Prakrti and himself and to enable him to gain Self-realization. 
That is the complete idea of evolution in a nutshell. But it is 
necessary to elaborate this idea to understand its full implications. 
Let us first see what are the powers of Purusa and Prakrti referred 
to in this Sutra. In order to understand this we have only to 
recall how total evolution leads to the gradual unfoldment of con- 
sciousness on the one hand and pari passu to the increase in the 
efficiency of the vehicles on the other. Leaving out of account 
the mineral kingdom in which the unfoldment of consciousness is 
so rudimentary as to be hardly perceptible; we find on studying 
the vegetable, animal and human kingdoms that consciousness in 
these kingdoms shows a remarkable increase in the degree of 
unfoldment as we pass from one kingdom to another. And side 
by side with the unfoldment of consciousness we find that the 
vehicle also becomes more and more complex and efficient for the 
expression of the unfolding consciousness. Not only do we find a 
13 



194 



SECTION n (23) 



remarkable increase in this dual evolution of life and form as we 
pass from one kingdom to another but taking any one kingdom by 
itself we can trace the steady evolution from one step to another, 
so that we can see the whole ladder of life as far as it can be seen 
with our limitations, stretching from the mineral kingdom to the 
civilized stage of the human kingdom with hardly any rungs 
missing 

What do we mean by the powers of Prakrti referred to in this 
Sutra? Obviously, these are not the general powers which are 
inherent in Nature and which are independent, as it were, of the 
dual evolution of life and form which is taking place around us. 
The powers of Prakrti to which reference is made here are un- 
doubtedly the capacities which develop in the vehicles as they 
evolve in association with consciousness. Compare the brain of a 
snail with that of a monkey and this again with that of a highly 
civilized man and you see the tremendous change which has taken 
place as regards the capacity of the vehicle to express the powers 
which are latent in consciousness. And the mental and spiritual 
powers which are exhibited by the highly civilized and intel- 
lectual men and women of today are as nothing compared to 
the powers which are developed by the advanced Yogi and which 
are in store for every child of man when he [Undertakes his higher 
evolution. A study of the various Siddhis or occult powers which 
are dealt with in Section III of the Toga-sutras will give the 
student some idea of the latent capacities which are lying hidden 
within each one of us, capacities which can be developed by the 
technique outlined in this book. 

It is necessary to distinguish between the powers of Prakrti and 
Purusa although the two are generally exercised in conjunction. 
The power of Prakrti is obviously the capacity of the vehicle to 
respond to the demands of consciousness. A particular vehicle of 
consciousness is a certain combination of matter on a particular 
plane integrated and held together by various forces and its effi- 
ciency depends upon how far it can respond to the powers of con- 
sciousness. The brain of an idiot is made of the same substance 
as the brain of a highly intellectual man but there is a world of 
difference between the capacities of the two to respond to thought 
vibrations. It is in the increasing peculiarity and complexity of 



SADHANA PADA 



195 



the vehicle that the secret of its greater responsiveness and effici- 
ency lies and this is what evolution of the' vehicle really means. 

If the response to consciousness determines the evolution of 
the vehicle what is meant by the unfoldment of the powers of 
consciousness or Purusa"? According to Yogic philosophy con- 
sciousness itself does not evolve. It is in some way which is 
incomprehensible to the intellect perfect, complete, eternal. When 
we refer to the powers of the Purusa in this joint development of 
the powers of the two what is meant is the power of consciousness 
to function through and in collaboration with the vehicle. As 
Purusa is pure consciousness and consciousness is eternal, there 
cannot be an evolution of his powers in the sense in which we take 
the word evolution. But we may suppose that he has to acquire 
the capacity to use those in association with the matter of the 
different planes. So that, as evolution proceeds his consciousness is 
able to express itself more and more fully on these planes and to 
manipulate and control his vehicles with increasing freedom and 
efficiency. What a tremendous task this is can be grasped only 
when we study in detail the long process of evolution through the 
different kingdoms of Nature and the total constitution of man 
which is involved in the process. As long as we confine ourselves 
to the phenomena of the physical plane we can never have an 
adequate idea of the magnitude and nature of the task, even 
though on the physical plane also the different phases of this long 
process present a stupendous spectacle. It is in the invisible 
realms of the mind and the Spirit that evolution produces its 
most magnificent results and the powers of the Purusa find their 
chief expression. 

Perhaps some idea of the necessity and manner of this develop- 
ment may be obtained from a simile. The music which a great 
musician can produce depends upon the quality and the efficiency 
of his instrument. Place an instrument in his hand which he has 
never used and he will feel helpless till he has mastered that 
instrument. The poor quality of the instrument will handicap him 
enormously. The quality of the music which can be produced 
depends upon three factors, the capacity of the musician, the 
efficiency of the instrument and the co-ordination of the two. 
Even though the Purusa has all the powers potentially unless he is 



196 



SECTION II (23, 24) 



provided with an efficient set of vehicles and learns to control and 
use these vehicles he may remain a helpless spectator of the world 
drama which is being played around him. It is in some such way 
that we can visualize through the intellect the gradual unfoldment 
of the powers of the Purusa along with the powers of Prakrti, though 
fundamentally, this question is an ultimate question connected 
with the ' why ' of manifestation and thus beyond the scope of 
the intellect. 

The simultaneous development of the vehicles on all the 
planes of manifestation and the capacity to use them is not the 
only purpose of bringing together Purusa and Prakrti. The Purusa 
has not only to master these vehicles but has also to transcend 
them. For, until and unless he can do this he will remain under 
the limitations of the planes to which he is confined and be sub- 
ject to their illusions. He is destined to be above the limitations 
and illusions of those planes as well as to be a master of those 
planes. This is what Self-realization or Svarupopalabdhi means to 
accomplish. These are not to be considered as two independent 
objectives. The complete mastery of the lower planes and their 
transcendence are really two aspects of the same problem because 
complete mastery on these planes is not possible until the Purusa 
passes out of the control of Prakrti. The last step in the mastery 
of anything generally consists in transcending it or going beyond 
its influence and control. Then only we can know it fully and 
control it completely. 

Tasya hetur avidya. 

cRT its (of the union) ^5: (effective) cause arf^rr ignorance ; 
lack of awareness of his Real nature. 

24. Its cause is the lack of awareness of his Real 
nature. 



After giving the purpose of the union of Purusa and Prakrti in 
the last Sutra Patanjali gives in this Sutra the effective cause of the 



SADHANA PADA 



197 



union or the means whereby the union is brought about. It 
should be noted that the word Hetufy is used both in the sense of 
object as well as effective cause and it is used in the latter sense 
in this Sutra. The Purusa by his very nature is eternal, omniscient 
and free and his involution in matter which involves tremendous 
limitations is brought about by his being made to lose the aware- 
ness of his Real nature. The power which deprives him of this 
knowledge or rather awareness of his Real nature is called Maya 
or Illusion in Hindu philosophy and the result of this privation 
of knowledge is called Avidya or ignorance. It is obvious that the 
words illusion and ignorance are used in their highest philosophical 
sense and we can barely get a glimpse into the real significance of 
these words. To understand M3y3 and Avidya in the real sense is 
to solve the Great Mystery of Life and to bs free from their domi- 
nation. This is the end and not the starting point of the search. 
How Avidya brings about in its train the other Klefas and lies 
at the root of all miseries to which embodied life is subject has 
been dealt with already in explaining the nature of Klesas, but 
there is one aspect of this union of Purusa and Prakrti which must 
be pointed out if we are to understand the meaning of this travail 
and suffering which evolution undoubtedly involves. We have 
seen already that there appears to be a mighty purpose hidden 
behind the working of the Universe though the nature of this pur- 
pose may be beyond our comprehension. One part of this purpose 
which we can see and understand is the gradual evolution of life 
culminating in the perfection and emancipation of the individual 
units of consciousness who are called Purusas. We have been sent 
down into the lower worlds in order that we may attain perfection 
through the experiences of these worlds. It is a tremendously 
long and tedious discipline but it is worthwhile as anybody will 
see who understands what this perfection means and knows those in 
whom this perfection fs embodied. Anyway, whether we like this 
process or not we are in it and have to go through it and it is no 
use behaving like children who try to avoid going to school and 
have to be sent there against their will. The best way of freeing 
ourselves from this necessity is to acquire perfection as quickly as 
we can. Then there will be no necessity of our being forced to 
remain in this school and our freedom will come automatically. 



198 



SECTION n (24, 25) 



It is very necessary to point out this aspect of our bondage 
because there are a large number of aspirants, especially in 
India, who have a rather strange notion with regard to the cause 
and nature of the bondage in which they find themselves. They 
do not take life on the lower planes as a kind of school in which 
they have to learn certain things but rather as a prison from which 
they have to escape as soon as possible. They hardly realize the 
implications of this attitude which really means that they consider 
God as a heartless Being who sends His children into the lower 
worlds just for the fun of seeing them go through all this pain and 
suffering. If life in the lower worlds is taken as a school then we 
shall not only feel no resentment against the severe discipline to 
which we are subjected but will also adopt the right means for 
getting out of the miseries and sufferings which are incidental to 
this life. The right means obviously is that we should learn the 
necessary lessons as thoroughly and as quickly as possible instead 
of merely devising means of escape which are bound to prove 
ineffective in the long run. Seen in this light Yogic discipline is 
merely the last phase of our training whereby our education is 
completed and rounded off before we are allowed to lead a free 
and independent life. 

Tad-abhavat samyogabhavo hanam tad 
drseh kaivalyam. 

3RT (of) that {Avidya) sniNId from absence or elimination 
*tVl*i (of) union; association srsrrq': disappearance j[FT (is) avoid- 
ance; remedy g^T that ^afr: of the Seer «JU<»a|^ (is) isolation; 
separation from everything (Liberation). 



25. The dissociation of Purusa and Prakrti brought 
about by the dispersion of Avidya is the real remedy 
and that is the Liberation of the Seer. 



SADHANA PADA 



199 



If the union of Purusa and Prakrti has been brought about 
by Maya or Avidya and leads through the development of the 
Klesas to the misery and sufferings of embodied existence it follows 
logically that the removal of these latter is possible only when 
the union is dissolved by the destruction of Avidya. The union is 
the sole cause of bondage. Its dissolution must therefore be the 
only means available for Emancipation or Kaivalya of the Seer. 
The bondage is maintained by the Purusa identifying himself with 
his vehicles right from the Atmic to the physical plane. The 
release is brought about by his disentangling himself in consciousness 
from his vehicles one after another until he stands free from them, 
even though using them merely as instruments. 

It should be clearly understood that the dissociation of 
consciousness from a particular vehicle is not merely a matter of 
understanding brought about by a process of reasoning and intel- 
lectual analysis; though such efforts can help us to a certain extent 
in relation to our lower vehicles. The illusion is destroyed com- 
pletely and in the real sense only when the Yogi is able to leave 
the vehicle at will in Samddhi and to look down upon it, as it were, 
from a higher plane. Then he realizes definitely that he is different 
from that particular vehicle and can never, after such an experi- 
ence, identify himself with that vehicle as has been explained in 
dealing with II -6. The process of separating off the vehicle and 
disentangling consciousness from it is repeated over and over 
again on the superphysical planes until the last vehicle — the 
Atmic — is transcended in Nirbija Samddhi and the Purusa stands 
free (Svarupe 'vasthanam) ' in his own-form '. It will be seen, there- 
fore, that the discarding of the successive vehicles of consciousness 
on the subtler planes, which can be done through the practice 
of Samddhi, is the only way of destroying Asmitd and Avidya and 
people who think that by merely repeating mentally formulas like 
Aham Brahmdsmi (I am Brahman) or by trying to imagine them- 
selves separate from their vehicles they can gain Self-realization 
do not really know the nature of the task which they are trying 
to accomplish. It is really amazing to what extent people can 
over-simplify problems and hypnotize themselves into believing 
that their generally trivial experiences mean realization of the 
Ultimate Truth. 



200 SECTION H. (26) 

Viveka-khyatir aviplava hanopayah. 

Pi^mwila: discriminative cognition; awareness of the dis- 
tinction between the Self and the not-Self; awareness of Reality 
arf^rwr unbroken; unfluctuating; unfailing; incessant ^l«flmq : the 
means of avoidance; the means of abolition; remedy; the means 
of dispersion. 

26. The uninterrupted practice of the awareness 
of the Real is the means of dispersion (of Avidya) . 

Having given in the previous Sutra the general principle 
underlying the destruction of Avidya the author gives in this Sutra 
the practical method which has to be adopted to bring this about. 
The method prescribed is the practice of uninterrupted Viveka- 
Khyati. What is this Viveka-Khyati? Viveka means, of course, dis- 
crimination between the Real and the unreal and the general idea 
underlying this word is familiar to students of Togic philosophy. 
Khyati is usually translated as knowledge or consciousness. So 
Viveka-Khyati means knowledge of the discrimination between the 
Real and the unreal. As this does not make much -sense let us 
examine the two words Viveka and Khyati more fully. 

Viveka is generally used for that state of the mind in which it is 
aware of the great problems of life and the illusions which are 
inherent in ordinary human life. In the state of Aviveka we take 
everything as a matter of course. The great problems of life do 
not exist for us, or if they do, they are of mere academic interest. 
There is no desire to question life, to see beyond its ordinary 
illusions, to discriminate between the things of real and permanent 
value and those of passing interest. When the light of Viveka 
dawns on the mind all this changes. We become very much 
alive to the fundamental problems of life, begin to question life's 
values and detach ourselves from the current of ordinary thoughts 
and desires, and above all, we want to find that Reality which is 
hidden behind the flux of phenomena. This is not a mere process 



SADHANA PADA 



201 



of thinking but an illuminated state of the mind. It may come 
temporarily as a result of some shock in life or may grow naturally 
and become a permanent feature of our outlook on life. 

When it is a normal feature of our life it is really the 
harbinger of the spiritual development which is to follow. The 
soul is awakening from its long spiritual sleep and now wants to 
find itself. It has reached maturity and wants to come into its 
Divine heritage. Ordinary Viveka is merely a symptom of these 
changes which are taking place in the recesses of the soul. 

Now, the point to be noted here is that this kind of Viveka is 
only a reflection of the spiritual consciousness into the lower mind, 
a sensing, as it were, of the Reality hidden within us. It is not 
an actual awareness of Reality, Viveka-Khyati is an actual aware- 
ness of Reality, a direct, immediate contact with the innermost 
spiritual consciousness, Pratyaksa knowledge of Reality. What the 
sense of touch is to the sense of sight that is Viveka to Viveka-Khyati. 
In the case of the former we merely sense the Reality within us 
more or less dimly. In the case of the latter we are in direct 
contact with it though in different degrees. 

The awareness of Reality or Viveka-Khyati is the opposite of 
Avidya — lack of awareness of Reality, the two being related to each 
other as light and darkness. When the Purusa is fully aware of 
Reality he is out of the dominion of Avidya. When he loses this 
awareness he relapses into Avidya and the other Klesas. It will be 
seen that real discrimination between the Real and the unreal is 
possible only when wc have experienced Reality and know both 
the Real and the unreal. When a beginner is asked to discri- 
minate between the Real and the unreal what is really meant is 
that he should learn to discriminate between the things of per- 
manent value in life and those which are transitory. 

In the light of what has been said above the meaning of the 
Sutra we are dealing with should become clear. Since Avidya can 
be overcome only by the awareness of Reality the cultivation of 
the latter obviously is the only means whereby release from 
bondage can be achieved. The significance of the word Aviplava 
is, of course, apparent. The awareness must be continuous, 
undisturbed. It is only then that Kaivalya may be considered to 
be attained. A mere glimpse of Reality does not constitute 



202 



SECTION II (26-28) 



SADHANA PADA 



203 



Kaivalya although it certainly shows that the goal is near. The 
Purusa must have reached the stage where this awareness can no 
longer be obscured even temporarily by Avidya. This point is 
developed more fully in the last Section. 

Tasya saptadha. pranta-bhumih prajfia. 

?TFT His (Purusa's) ^kiitll sevenfold HI'-d'HT^: a definite stage; 
step; layer; ' bordering ' province JRTT the cognitive consciousness. 

27. In his case the highest stage of Enlightenment 
is reached by seven stages. 

This Sutra merely points out that the state of uninterrupted 
awareness of Reality is attained through seven stages. After the 
Togi has obtained his first glimpse of Reality he has to pass 
through seven stages of increasing awareness before he reaches 
the final goal of Kaivalya, The word Pranta-bhumiht is used to 
indicate that progress through these stages does not take place by 
sudden jumps, as it were, but by gradual transition from one stage 
to another like traversing a country divided into seven adjacent 
provinces. 

A good deal of rigmarole has been written in explaining this 
Sutra by some commentators. It is quite natural that the process 
of attaining full Enlightenment should be gradual and should be 
attained by stages. But to identify these transcendent changes in 
consciousness with ordinary processes of thinking as has been done 
by some commentators is really absurd. It is better to leave the 
problem as it is, as a matter of transcendent experiences which 
cannot be interpreted in terms of the thinking processes. 

Yoganganusthanad asuddhi-ksaye jfiana- 
diptir a viveka-khyateh. 



%' 



AfHll^ (of) component parts of Toga; (exercises) or steps of 
Toga 3PT65FTRT by practice or following 3T7[fe of impurity SPT on 
the destruction (the idea is of gradual diminishing) sTR" knowledge 
(spiritual knowledge) <lfki: shining forth; radiance 3TT faq^'s^m: 
till awareness of Reality or discriminative knowledge (arises). 

28. From the practice of the component exercises 
of Toga, on the destruction of impurity, arises spiritual 
illumination which develops into awareness of Reality. 

11-28 deals with the problem of guidance needed on the path 
of Toga. It has been said already that ordinary Viveka ,is an 
expression of the spiritual consciousness hidden behind the mind. 
If it is real it gives a sufficiently strong urge to the aspirant to 
take to the path of Toga and adopt its discipline. But it is not 
sufficiently definite to lead him on the path of Toga and to provide 
him with the necessary guidance in the mysterious realm of the 
Unknown. Where is this guidance to come from? According to 
this Sutra guidance on the path of Toga comes from within in the 
form of spiritual illumination. This light of spiritual consciousness 
which is akin to intuition but more definite in its working appears 
only when the impurities of the mind have been destroyed to a 
great extent as a result of practising Togic discipline. This inner 
light of wisdom has been given many beautiful and suggestive 
names such as ' The Voice of the Silence ', 'Light on the Path ' 
and perhaps the most graphic and illuminative description of its 
nature and mode of expression is found in the little book Light on 
the Path by Mabel Collins. 

There are two points which the Sadhaka must note with 
regard to this Jnana-dipti. The first is that this light comes from 
within and makes him, to a great extent, independent of external 
guidance. The more we penetrate into the deeper recesses of our 
consciousness the more we have to rely upon our own inner 
resources since nothing outside can help us. In a way, a Sadhaka 
becomes really qualified to tread the path of Toga only after this 
inner light appears within his mind. All preliminary training in 
Toga is meant to provide him with this inner source of illumination. 



204 



section n (28) 



All teachers who help him in the early stages have this as their 
main objective so that he may be able to stand on his own legs. 

The second point to note in this connection is that this inner 
light of wisdom continues to grow and provide guidance until the 
stage of Viveka-Khyati is reached. That is the significance of the 
word A preceding the word Viveka-Khyati in the Sutra: The light 
grows stronger and stronger as the Sadhaka makes progress on the 
Path and draws near to his goal, until he gains his first experience 
of Reality. Then, of course, the light of spiritual wisdom becomes 
unnecessary as far as he is concei - ned because he is now in the 
primary source of inner Illumination, the Enlightenment of 
Reality itself. It will be seen that ordinary Viveka, Jiidna-dipti, 
Viveka-Khyati are manifestations in different degrees of the same 
Light which shines iri its fullest and uninterrupted splendour in 
Kaivalya. Viveka enables the Sadhaka to enter the path of Toga. 
Jnana-dipti enables him to tread it safely and steadily, Viveka- 
Khyati gives him the experience of Reality and Kaivalya sees him 
established in that Reality permanently. 

The philosophy of Klesas which has been expounded by 
Patanjali in such a masterly manner in the first portion of 
Section II deals with the great problem of human life completely 
and effectively. It goes to the root-cause of human bondage and 
suffering and prescribes a remedy which is not only effective but 
brings about a permanent cure. This philosophy should therefore 
be considered not as a mere accessory but an integral part of Yogic 
philosophy, upon which alone a stable structure of Yogic life can 
be built. Those who come to Yoga out of curiosity drop out sooner 
or later unable to bear its ceaseless strain and the ruthless stripping 
of the personality which is involved. Some come driven by vulgar 
ambition and a spirit of self-aggrandizement. Their career, if it 
is not cut short in some way, generally ends in disaster or leads 
them to the Left-hand path, which is worse. A few come to Yoga 
because they find that it is the only means of securing release from 
the limitations and illusions of human life and its miseries. They 
have understood thoroughly the philosophy of Klesas and even Siddhis 
or other attractions of the Yogic life have no power to hold them 
back or make them tarry in the illusions of the higher realms. They 
are the only people who are really qualified to tread this path. 



SADHANA PADA 



205 



A 



Yama-niyamasana-pranayama-pratyahara- 
dharana-dhyana-samadhayo'stav 
angani. 

?W Self-restraints; vows of abstention failH fixed obser- 
vances; binding rules which must be observed 3TTCPT posture 
sriuimm regulation of breath SIWT^R abstraction y|<u|| concentra- 
tion ; holding on to one idea or object in the mind or by the mind 
SJTFT meditation; contemplation ( c con-templa-tion ' which means 
working out an area, a templum for observation fits in with the 
definition of EnTTT in the text and con-centra-tion which means 
confining to a centre fits in with the definition of SZTFT as given 
in the text. Yet, on the whole, considering the conventional 
uses of the two words it seems best to render £j|<u|| by concentra- 
tion and Ui\*\ by contemplation) *T*nsnT: (and) trance 3rc^ (are) 
^he eight 3T^tPt limbs; constituent parts. 

29. Self-restraints, fixed observances, posture, re- 
gulation of breath, abstraction, concentration, con- 
templation, trance are the eight parts (of the self- 
discipline of Toga) . 

The system of Yoga put forward by Patanjali has eight parts 
and is therefore called Astanga Yoga. Other systems which are 
based on a different technique naturally adopt other classifications 
and have therefore a different number of Angas . This Sutra merely 
enumerates the eight constituent parts of this system of Yoga. 

The only point which is worth considering in this Sutra is 
whether the eight Angas in this system are to be taken as indepen- 
dent parts or as stages which follow each other in natural sequence. 
The use of the word Angas which means limbs implies that they 
are to be taken as related but non-sequential parts, but the manner 



206 



SECTION II (29, 30) 



in which Pa tafijaJi has dealt with them in the text shows that they 
have a certain sequential relationship. Anyone who examines 
carefully the nature of these parts cannot fail to see that they are 
related to one another in a definite manner and follow one another 
in a natural manner in the order in which they are given above. 
In systematic practice of higher Toga, therefore, they have to be 
taken in the sense of stages and the order in which they are given 
has to be adhered to, as far as possible. But, as a Sadhaka can 
take up for practice any of the Angas without adhering to this 
sequence these parts may be considered independent also to 
some extent. 

Ahimsa-satyasteya-brahmacaryaparigraha 
yamah. 

arffrgr non-violence; harmlessness- ^T truthfulness 3R^r 
honesty; non-misappropriativeness sl^M^ sexual continence 3iqfT- 
?I^T (and) non-possessiveness; non-acquisitiveness mTT: (are) self- 
restraints; vows of abstention. 

30. Vows of self-restraint comprise abstention 
from violence, falsehood, theft, incontinence and 
acquisitiveness. 

Tama and Niyama the first two Angas of Toga are meant to 
provide an adequate moral foundation for the Togic training. The 
very fact that they are placed before the other Angas shows their 
basic character. Before dealing with the moral qualities and 
general mode of life which are implied in Tama-Niyama it is 
necessary to explain a few things about the place of morality in 
the Togic life. 

Incredible as it may sound, morality of a high order is 
not always necessary for the practice of Toga. There are two 
kinds of Toga — lower and higher. The lower has for its object the 



SADHANA PADA 



207 



development of certain psychic faculties and supernormal powers 
and for this the transcendent morality implied in Tama-Niyama is not 
at all necessary ; in fact, it acts as a hindrance because it causes inner 
conflict and prevents the Togi from going ahead with his pursuit 
of personal power and ambitions. There are a large number of 
Togis scattered throughout India, Tibet and other countries who 
undoubtedly possess supernormal powers and faculties but who 
are not distinguishable from the ordinary man of the world by 
any special moral or spiritual traits of character. Some of these 
men are good people, self-centred or vain but harmless. Others, 
of another class, cannot be considered innocent and hai-mless. 
They are prone to take part in questionable activities and under 
provocation can cause injury to those who cross their path. There 
is a third class of Togis who definitely tread the Left-hand path 
and are called Brothers of the Shadow. They have powers of 
various kinds developed to a high degree, are unscrupulous and 
dangerous, though outwardly they may adopt a mode of life which 
makes them appear religious. But anyone in whom intuition is 
developed can spot these people and distinguish them from the 
followers of the Right-hand path by their tendency to cruelty, 
unscrupulousness and conceit. 

The higher Toga which is expounded in the Toga-sutras should 
be distinguished very carefully from the lower Toga referred to 
above. It has for its objective not the development of powers 
which can be used for self-aggrandizement or satisfaction of conceit 
but Enlightenment and consequent freedom from the illusions 
and limitations of the lower life. Since in gaining this Enlighten- 
ment the Sadhaka has to undergo certain physical and mental 
disciplines which are the same as those adopted by the followers of 
the Left-hand path, the two paths seem to run parallel for some 
distance. But the time comes at an early stage when the paths 
begin to diverge rapidly. One leads to an ever-increasing con- 
centration of power in the individual and his isolation from the 
One Life, the other to the progressive merging of the individual 
consciousness in the One Consciousness and freedom from bondage 
and illusion. The hope of the former is naturally very limited 
and confined to the realm of the intellect while there is no limit 
to the achievement of the Togi on the other. 



V 



208 



SECTION H (30) 



On the path of higher Toga morality of a high order is essential 
and it is a morality not of the conventional type, not even of 
ordinary religious type. It is a transcendent morality based on 
the higher laws of Nature and organized with a view to bring 
about the liberation of the individual from the bonds of illusion 
and ignorance. Its object is not to achieve limited happiness 
within the illusions of the lower life but to gain true and lasting 
happiness or Peace by transcending those illusions. This is a 
point which must be clearly understood because to many students 
of Togic philosophy Togic morality appears to be unnecessarily 
harsh and forbidding. They cannot understand why it should not 
be possible to practise a morality which will allow us to have 
reasonable enjoyments of the worldly life as well as the peace 
and knowledge of the higher, the best of both the worlds as we 
say. According to some, Brahmacarya should be compatible with 
moderate sexual indulgence. Ahimsa should allow one to defend 
oneself against attacks from others. Such compromises with the 
demands of Togic morality seem quite reasonable from the worldly 
standpoint, but anyone who studies the philosophy of Toga care- 
fully will see the utter futility of trying to keep a hold on this 
world while trying to conquer the Great Illusion. Not that it is 
not possible to practise Toga at all without giving up these things 
entirely but the progress of the Sddhaka is bound to stop at one 
stage or another if he tries to make these compromises. 

Another important point to understand with regard to 'Togic 
morality is that the virtues which are prescribed have a much 
wider scope and deeper significance than what appears on the 
surface. Each virtue included in Tama, for example, is a typical 
representative of a class of virtues which have to be practised 
to a high degree of perfection. The injunction against killing, 
stealing, lying, etc., under Tama does not seem to represent a very 
high standard of morality even from ordinary standards. Any 
decent and good individual is expected to abstain from such 
anti-social conduct. Where is then the high standard of 
morality which is demanded by higher Toga? In order to remove 
this doubt it is necessary to remember, as has been pointed 
out above, that each virtue is more comprehensive in its 
meaning than what it is generally considered to be. Thus 



SADHANA PADA 



209 



Ahimsa does not mean merely abstaining from murder but not 
wilfully inflicting any injury, suffering or pain on any living 
creature, by word, thought or action. Ahimsa thus stands for the 
highest degree of harmlessness which is found only among saints 
and sages and any ordinary person trying to practise it seriously 
in his life will soon begin to feel that perfect harmlessness is an 
unrealizable ideal. The same holds true in the case of the other 
virtues comprised in Tama. To what degree of perfection these 
virtues can be developed is shown in the eleven Sutras, II (35-45). 
It should thus be clear that the morality enjoined in Tama- 
Niyama, though apparently simple, represents a very drastic 
ethical code and is designed to serve as a sufficiently strong foun- 
dation for the life of higher Toga. It does not deal with the 
superficial aberrations and failings of human nature nor is its 
purpose to make a good social, law-abiding individual. It goes 
to the very bedrock of human nature and lays the foundation of 
the Togic life there, so that it may be able to bear the enormous 
weight of the sky-scraper which Togic life really is. 

The main object of this relentless ethical code is to eliminate 
completely all mental and emotional disturbances which charac-, 
terize the life of an ordinary human being. Anyone who is 
familiar with the working of the human mind should not find it 
difficult to understand that no freedom from emotional and mental 
disturbances is possible until the tendencies dealt with under 
Tama-Kiyama have been rooted out or, at least, mastered to a 
sufficient degree. Hatred, dishonesty, deception, sensuality, 
possessiveness are some of the common and ingrained vices of the 
human race and as long as a human being is subject to these 
vices in their crude or subtle forms so long will his mind remain 
a prey to violent or hardly perceptible emotional disturbances 
which have their ultimate source in these vices. And, as 
long as these disturbances continue to affect the mind it is 
useless to undertake the more systematic and advanced practice 
of Toga. 

After this general consideration of Tama-J&yama let us discuss 
briefly the significance of the five moral qualities given in 11-30 
under Tama. Since this is a matter which is of the greatest impor- 
tance to the beginner it may be discussed in some detail. 
14 



210 



SECTION n (30) 



Ahimsd: Ahimsd really denotes an attitude and mode of 
behaviour towards all living creatures based on the recognition of 
the underlying unity of life. As Togic philosophy is based on the 
doctrine of the One Life it is easy to see why our outer behaviour 
should be made to conform to this all-embracing Law of Life. If 
we understand this principle thoroughly the application of the 
ideal in our life will become much easier. 

There are many people who, without making any earnest 
effort to practise Ahimsd, start raising imaginary problems and enter 
into academic discussions as to what Ahimsd really is and how far 
it is practicable in life. This is essentially a wrong approach to 
the problem because no hard and fast rules can be laid down in 
this as in other matters related to our conduct. Each situation in 
life is unique and requires a fresh and vital approach. What is 
right under a particular set of circumstances cannot be determined 
in a mechanical fashion by weighing all the facts and striking a 
balance. The correct insight into right action under every set- of 
circumstances is the result of a developed and purified Buddhi or 
discriminative faculty and this function of Buddhi, unhindered by 
the complexes in our mind, is possible only after prolonged training 
in doing the right thing at all cOsts. It is only by doing the right 
that we get added strength to do right in the future and also 
acquire the capacity to see what is right. There is no other way. 
So the Sddhaka who wishes to perfect himself in the practice of 
Ahimsd leaves all academic considerations aside, keeps a strict 
watch over his mind, emotions, words and actions and starts 
regulating them in accordance with his ideal. Slowly, as he 
succeeds in putting his ideal into practice, the cruelties and 
injustices involved in his thoughts, actions and words will gradually 
reveal themselves, his vision will clear tip and the right course of 
conduct under every set of circumstances will become known 
intuitively. And gradually, this seemingly negative idea of harm- 
lessness will transform itself into the positive and dynamic life of 
love both in its aspect of tender compassion towards all living 
creatures and its practical form, service. 

Satya : The second moral quality denoted by the word Satya 
has also to be taken in a far more comprehensive sense than mere 
truthfulness. It means strict avoidance of all exaggerations, 



SADHANA PADA 



211 



equivocation, pretence and similar faults which are involved in 
saying or doing things which are not in strict accordance with 
what we knOw as true. Downright lying is considered bad in 
civilized society but there are many variants of untruthfulness in 
speech and action which are not regarded as reprehensible in our 
conventional life. But all these must be completely eliminated 
from the life of the Sddhaka. 

Why is truthfulness essential for the Togic life? Firstly because 
untruthfulness in all its various forms creates all kinds of un- 
necessary complications in our life. and so is a constant source of 
disturbance to the mind. To the foolish man whose intuition has 
become clouded lying is one of the simplest and easiest means of 
getting out of an undesirable situation or difficulty. He is unable 
to see that in avoiding one difficulty in this manner he creates 
many others of a more serious nature. Anyone who decides to 
keep a watchful eye on his thoughts and actions will notice that 
usually one lie requires a number of other lies for its support and 
in spite of all his efforts, in most cases, circumstances take »uch an 
unexpected turn that the lie is exposed sooner or later. This 
effort to keep up falsehoods and false appearances causes a 
peculiar strain in our sub-conscious mind and provides a congenial 
soil for all kinds of emotional disturbances. Of course, these 
things are not noticed by the ordinary man living a life of conven- 
tional falsehoods. It is only \yhen he begins to practise truthful- 
ness that the subtler forms of untruthfulness begin to reveal 
themselves to his eye. It is a law of Nature that we become aware 
of the subtler forms of any vice when we have eliminated its 
grosser forms. 

Apart from the considerations given above, truthfulness has to 
be practised by the Sddhaka because it is absolutely necessary for 
the unfoldment of Buddhi or intuition. The Yogi has to face many 
problems, the solution of which cannot be found either in reference 
books or conclusions based on correct thinking. The only means 
at his disposal to solve such problems is an unclouded or pure 
Buddhi or intuition. Now, there is nothing which clouds the 
intuition and practically stops its functioning in this manner as 
untruthfulness in all its forms. A person who starts practising 
Yoga without first acquiring the virtue of utter truthfulness is like 



212 



section n (30) 



a man going for exploration into a jungle at night without any 
light. He has nothing to guide him in his difficulties and the 
illusions created by the Brothers of the Shadow are sure to lead 
him astray. That is why the Yogi must first put on the armour 
of perfect truthfulness in thought, word and deed, for no illusions 
can pierce such an armour. 

Leaving these utilitarian considerations aside the absolute 
necessity of leading a perfectly straightforward life for the Yogi 
follows from the very nature of the Reality upon which the 
Universe and our life are based. This Reality in its essential" 
nature is Love and Truth and expresses itself through the great 
fundamental laws of Love and Truth which ultimately conquer 
everything. The outer and inner life of the Yogi who is seeking 
this Reality must, therefore, conform strictly to these basic laws 
of Nature if his efforts are to be crowned with success. Anything 
which is against the law of Love puts us out of harmony with this 
law and we are pulled back sooner or later at the cost of much 
suffering to ourselves — that is why Ahirnsa is enjoined. Similarly, 
untruthfulness in any form puts us out of harmony with the 
fundamental law of Truth and creates a kind of mental and 
emotional strain which prevents us from harmonizing and tran- 
quillizing our mind. 

Asteya: Asteya literally means abstaining from stealing. Here 
also we have to take the word in a very comprehensive sense and 
not merely interpret it in terms of the penal code. Few people 
who have developed some moral sense will go to the length of 
actual stealing but there are very few who can be considered quite 
guiltless from the strictly moral point of view. This is so because 
many indirect and subtle forms of misappropriation are connived 
at in our conventional life and our rather insensitive conscience 
does not feel appreciably disturbed when we take part in these 
shady transactions. The so-called civilized man will not allow 
himself to put a silver spoon in his pocket when he goes out to a 
public dinner but his conscience may not prick him adequately 
when he gives or receives gratification for doing his duty. 

Asteya should really not be interpreted as abstaining from 
stealing but abstaining from misappropriation of all kinds. The 
would-be Yogi cannot allow himself to take anything which does 



SADHANA PADA 



213 



not properly belong to him, not only in the way of money or goods 
but even such intangible and yet highly prized things as credit 
for things he has not done or privileges which do not properly 
belong to him. It is only when a person succeeds in eliminating 
to a certain extent this tendency towards misappropriation in its 
cruder forms that he begins to discover the subtler forms of dis- 
honesty which are woven in our life and of which we are hardly 
conscious. The aspirant who intends to tread the path of higher 
Yoga has to proceed systematically in the gradual elimination 
of these undesirable tendencies until their last traces have been 
removed and the mind rendered pure and in consequence tranquil. 
He should practise these prescribed virtues as a fine art aiming at 
greater and greater refinement in the application of the moral 
principles to the problems of his daily life. 

Brahmacarya: Of all the virtues enjoined in Yama-Jfiyama this 
appears to be the most forbidding and many earnest students who 
are deeply interested in Yogie philosophy fight shy of its practical 
application in their life because they are afraid they-will have to 
give up the pleasures of sex-indulgence. Many Western writers 
have tried to solve the problem by suggesting a liberal inter- 
pretation of Brahmacarya and taking it to mean not complete 
abstinence but regulated moderate indulgence within lawful 
wedlock. The Eastern student who is more familiar with the 
traditions and actual conditions of Yogie practice does not make 
this mistake. He knows that the real Yogie life cannot be com- 
bined with the self-indulgence and waste of vital force which is 
involved in the pleasures of sex life and he has to choose between 
the two. He may not be required to give up sex life all at once 
but he has to give it up completely before he can start the serious 
practice of higher Yoga as distinguished from mere theoretical 
study or even Yogie practices of a preparatory nature. 

To the serioi nd advanced student this desire to combine 
the enjoyments of tne worldly life with the peace and transcendent 
knowledge of the higher life seems rather pathetic and shows the 
absence of a true sense of values with regard to the realities of the 
Yogie life and therefore unfitness for leading this life. Those who 
can equate or even consider comparable sensual enjoyments with 
the peace and bliss of the higher life for which the Yogi strives and 



214 



SECTION II (30) 



can consequently hesitate in giving up the former, have yet to 
develop the strong intuition which tells them unequivocally that 
they have to sacrifice a mere shadow for the real thing, a passing 
sensation for life's greatest gift. Let the student who feels hesita- 
tion in giving up such enjoyments of the senses or seeks a compro- 
mise, honestly ask himself whether he believes that a person who 
is a slave of his passions is really fit to embark on this divine 
adventure and the answer that he will get from within will be 
clear and unequivocal. 

So this is the first thing which must be clearly understood 
with regard to Brahmacarya. The practice of higher Toga requires 
complete abstinence from sex life and no compromise on this 
point is possible. Of course, there are many Aftgas of Toga which 
the would-be Togi can practise, to some extent, by way of prepara- 
tion, but he must definitely and systematically prepare to give up 
completely not only physical indulgence but even thoughts and 
emotions connected with the pleasures of sex. 

The second point to note in this connection is that Brahma- 
carya in its wider sense stands not only for abstinence from sexual 
indulgence but freedom from craving for all kinds of sensual 
enjoyments. The pursuit of sensual pleasures is so much a part 
of our life and we depend to such an extent on these for our happi- 
ness that it is considered quite natural and blameless for anybody 
to indulge in these enjoyments within the limits of moderation 
and social obligations. The use of scents, indulgence in the 
pleasures of the palate, wearing furs and similar pleasures of the 
senses are so common that no blame attaches to the pursuit of 
such enjoyments even where they involve terrible suffering to 
countless living creatures. It is all taken as a matter of course 
and very few people ever give even a passing thought to these 
things. And for the man who is leading the ordinary life in the 
world moderate enjoyments of a kind which do not involve any 
suffering to other creatures do not really matter. They are a 
part of the normal life at his stage of evolution. But for the 
would-be Togi these seemingly innocent enjoyments are harmful, 
not because there is anything ' sinful ' about them, but because 
they carry with them the potentiality for constant mental and 
emotional disturbances No one who allows himself to be attracted 



sadhana pada 



215 



by the ' objects of the senses ' can hope to be free from the worries 
and anxieties which characterize the life of the worldly man. 
Besides being a source of constant mental disturbance the pursuit 
of sensual enjoyments tends to undermine the will and to keep up 
an attitude of mind which militates against a whole-hearted 
pursuit of the Toglc ideal. 

It is, however, necessary to understand what is really to be 
aimed at in giving up sensual enjoyments. As long as we are 
living in the world and moving among all kinds of objects which 
affect the sense-organs we cannot avoid feeling sensuous pleasures 
of various kinds. When we eat tasty food we cannot help feeling 
a certain amount of sensuous pleasure — it is the natural result of 
the food coming in contact with the taste-buds and arousing 
particular sensations. Has the Togi then to attempt the impossi- 
ble task of shutting out all pleasurable sensations? No! not at all. 
The trouble lies not in feeling the sensation which is quite natural 
and in itself harmless but in the craving for the repetition of the 
experiences which involve pleasurable sensations. It is that which 
has to be guarded against and rooted out because it is the desire 
(Kama) which disturbs the mind and creates Samskaras and 
not the actual sensation. The Togi moves among all kinds of 
objects as anybody else but his mind is not attached to objects 
which give pleasure or repelled from objects which give pain. 
He is, therefore, unaffected by the presence or absence of different 
kinds of objects. The contact with an object produces a partic- 
ular sensation but the matter ends there. 

But this condition of non-attachment can be attained only 
after a very prolonged and severe self-discipline and renunciation 
of all kinds of objects which give pleasure, though in the case of 
some exceptional Sadhakds who bring powerful Samskaras from past 
lives it comes naturally and easily. There are some people who 
allow themselves to remain under the self-deception that they are 
unattached to enjoyments of the senses even though they continue 
outwardly to indulge in them. It will help these people to 
destroy this self-deception if they ask themselves seriously why they 
continue to indulge in those pleasures if they have really out- 
grown them. The fact is that for the ordinary Sddhaka it is only 
by renouncing pleasures of the senses that indifference towards 



216 



section n (30) 



them can be developed and tested. Austerity is thus a necessary 
part of the Togic discipline. Those who allow themselves to lead 
the soft life of sensual pleasures under the illusion that ' these 
things do not touch them ' are merely postponing the effort for the 
earnest pursuit- of the Togic ideal. To the worldly-minded this 
austerity appears forbidding if not meaningless and they frequently 
wonder what the Togi really lives for. But to the Togi this freedom 
from attachment brings an undefinable peace of mind and inner 
strength beside which the enjoyments of the senses appear 
intolerable. 

Aparigraha: Aparigraha is sometimes translated as absence of 
greediness but non-possessiveness perhaps gives the underlying idea 
better. In order to understand why it is essential for the would-be 
Togi to eliminate this tendency in his life we have only to consider 
the tremendous bias which it gives to our life. The tendency to 
accumulate worldly goods is so strong that it may be considered 
almost a basic instinct in human life. Of course, as long as we 
live in the physical world we have to have a few things which are 
essential for the maintenance of the body, although essential and 
non-essential are relative terms nd there seems to be no limit to 
the cutting down of even what are considered the necessities of 
life. But we are not satisfied with the necessities of life. We 
must have things which may be classed as luxuries. These are 
not necessary for keeping body and soul together but are meant to 
increase our comforts and enjoyments. We do not, however, stop 
even at luxuries. When we have at our disposal all the means that 
can ensure all possible comforts and enjoyments for the rest of our 
life we are still not satisfied and continue to amass wealth and ; 
things. One would think that a palace should suffice for the real 
needs of a human being but one who has a palace is not satisfied 
and wants to build a few more. Of course, these extra things do 
not serve any purpose except that of satisfying our childish vanity 
and desire to appear superior to our fellow men. There is no limit 
to our desire for wealth and the material things which we like to 
have around us and obviously, therefore, we are dealing here with 
an instinct which has no relation with reason or commonsense. 

Apart from the complications which this human instinct 
causes in the world in the social and economic fields which we 



SADHANA PADA 



217 



need not discuss here, its effect on the life of the individual is of a 
nature which makes its elimination for the would-be Yogi an 
absolute necessity. Let us consider a few of the factors which are 
involved. First, you have to spend time and energy in the accu- 
mulation of things which you do not really need. Then you have 
to spend time and energy in maintaining and guarding the things 
which you have accumulated, the worries and anxieties of life 
increasing proportionately with the increase in the accumulations. 
Then consider the constant fear of losing the things, the pain 
and anguish of actually losing some of them every now and then 
and the regret of leaving them behind when you ultimately bid 
goodbye to this world. Now add up all these things and see what 
a colossal waste of time, energy and mental force all this involves. 
No one who is at all serious about the solution of the deeper 
problems of life can afford to squander his limited resources in 
this manner. So the would-be Togi cuts down his possessions and 
requirements to the minimum and eliminates from his life all 
these unnecessary accumulations and activities which fritter away 
his energies and are a source of constant disturbance to the mind. 
He remains satisfied with what comes to him in the natural course 
of the working of the law of Karma. 

It may be pointed out, however, that it is really not the 
quantity of things by which- we are surrounded but our attitude 
towards them which matters. For there may be only a few things 
in our possession and yet the instinct of possessiveness may be 
very strong. On the other hand, we may be rolling in wealth 
and yet be free from any sense of possession. Many interesting 
stories are told in the Hindu scriptures to illustrate this point, the 
story of Janaka who lived in a palace and the hermit who lived 
in a hut being well known. It is possible to live in the most 
luxurious circumstances with no feeling of possession and readiness 
to part with everything without the slightest hesitation. But 
though this is possible it is not easy and the would-be Yogi would 
do well to cut out all unnecessary things, for it is only in this way 
he can learn to live the simple and austere life. Even if he 
is not attached to his possessions he will have to spend time and 
energy in maintaining the paraphernalia and this he cannot 
afford to do. 



218 



SECTION U (30, 31) 



But it must be clearly understood that the necessity for cul- 
tivating this virtue lies chiefly in ensuring a state of mind which 
is free from attachments. The additional advantages which have 
been referred to above, though important, are of a subsidiary 
nature. 

Jati-desa-kala-samayanavacchinna^i sar- 
vabhauma maha-vratam. 

^rrf^r (by) class; birth- type ^T place ^ra - time *r*PT (and) 
occasion; circumstance; condition 3M4fW?ll<: not-limited, quali- 
fied or conditioned <U4*Am: extending or applying to all stages; 
*TfIWT the Great Vow. 

31. These (the five vows), not conditioned by- 
class, place, time or occasion and extending to all stages 
constitute the Great Vow. 

After giving the five basic virtues which have to be practised 
by the would-be Yagi in 11-30, Patanjali lays down another prin- 
ciple in the next Sutra the importance of which is not generally 
realized. In the practising of any virtue there are occasions when 
doubts arise whether it is feasible or advisable to practise that 
particular virtue in the particular situation which has arisen. 
Considerations of class, place, time or occasion may be involved in 
these situations and the Sddhaka may find it difficult to decide 
what should be done under those circumstances. Take for illustra- 
tion the following hypothetical situations. A friend of yours whom 
you know to be innocent is going to be hanged but can be saved 
if you tell a lie. Should you tell that lie? (occasion). Accumula- 
tion of wealth and its proper distribution is the Dharma of a 
Vatiya according to Hindu Varndsrama Dharma. Should a Vaisya 
who aspires to be a Yogi, therefore, relax his vow with regard to 
Aparigraha, and continue to amass wealth? (class). Your country 



SADHANA PADA 



219 



is at war with another. Should you join the army and agree to 
kill the nationals of the enemy as you are required to do? (time). 
You have to go to the Arctic region where it is necessary to kill 
animals for food. Are you free to modify your vow with regard 
to Ahimsd in the peculiar circumstances in which you are placed? 
(place) . Hundreds of such questions are bound to arise in the life 
of the would-be Yogi and he may sometimes be in doubt whether 
the five vows are to be practised strictly or exceptions can be 
made under special circumstances. This Sutra sets at rest all such 
doubts by making it absolutely clear that no exceptions can be 
allowed in the practice of the Great Vow as the five vows are 
called collectively. He may be put to great inconvenience, he 
may have to pay great penalties in the observance of these vows — 
even the extreme penalty of death — but none of these vows may be 
broken under any conditions. Even if life has to be sacrificed in 
the observance of his vow he should go through the ordeal cheer- 
fully in the firm conviction that the tremendous influx of spiritual 
power which is bound to take place under these conditions will far 
outweigh the loss of a single life. He who is out to unravel the 
Ultimate Mystery of life has to risk his life in doing the right on 
many occasions, and considering the tremendous nature of the 
achievement which is at stake the loss of one or two lives does not 
matter. Besides, he should know that in a Universe governed by 
Law and based on Justice no real harm can come to a person who 
tries to do the right. When he has to suffer under these circum- 
stances it is usually due to past Karma and it is therefore better to 
go through the unpleasant experience and have done with the 
Kdrmic obligation for good. Usually, the problems which arise are 
meant only to test us to the utmost and when we show our deter- 
mination to do the right thing at any cost they are resolved in the 
most unexpected manner. 

While, in one way, this uncompromising adherence to one's 
principles makes the observance of the Great Vow not an easy 
matter and may involve great hardships on occasions, in another 
way, it simplifies the problem of our life and conduct to a very 
great extent. It eliminates completely the difficulty of deciding 
what has to be done under all kinds of situations in which the 
Sddhaka may find himself. The universality of the Vow leaves no 



220 



section n (31, 32) 



loop-holes through which his mind may tempt him to escape and 
his course of action on most occasions will be quite clear. He can 
follow the right path unhesitatingly, knowing that there is no 
other path open to him. 

It should be noted, however, that though there is insistence 
on doing the right, the interpretation of what is right is always 
left to his discretion. He has to do what he thinks to be right, 
not what others tell him. If he does wrong, thinking it to be right, 
nature will teach him through suffering but the will to do the 
right at any cost will progressively clear his vision and lead him 
to the stage where he can see the right unerringly. Seeing the 
right depends upon doing the right. Hence the tremendous 
importance of righteousness in the life of the Yogi. 

Sauca-saijitosa-tapati-svadhyayesvara- 
pranidhanani niyamaljL. 

sfrf purity; cleanliness *Rfta" contentment 5PT: austerity 
v\v*\\** self-study; study which leads to knowledge of the Self 
V*tvif«ieiiiiPj (and) self-surrender; resignation to God fSpPTT: 
(fixed) observances. 

32. Purity, contentment, austerity, self-study and 
self-surrender constitute observances. 

We now come to Niyama, the second Afiga of Togic discipline 
which serves to lay the foundation of the Togic life. Before we 
deal with the five elements of Niyama enumerated in this SUtra it 
is necessary to consider the distinction between Tama and Niyama. 
Superficially examined, Tama and Niyama both seem to have a 
common purpose — the transmutation of the lower nature so that 
it may serve properly as a vehicle of the Togic life. But a closer 
study of the elements included under the two heads will reveal at 
once the difference in the general nature of the practices enjoined 
for bringing about the necessary changes in the character of the 



SADHANA PADA 



221 



Sadhaka. The practices included in Tama are, in a general way, 
moral and prohibitive while those in Niyama are disciplinal and 
constructive. The former aim at laying the ethical foundation of 
the Togic life and the latter at organizing the life of the Sadhaka 
for the highly strenuous Togic discipline which is to follow. 

This difference in the general purpose of Tama and Niyama 
involves a corresponding difference in the nature of the practices 
themselves. In the observance of the Great Vow connected with 
Tama the Sadhaka is not required to do anything. Day after day, 
he is required to react to the incidents and events in his life in a 
well-defined manner, but the number and character of the occa- 
sions which will arise in his life requiring the exercise of the five 
virtues will naturally depend upon his circumstances. If, for 
example, he goes and lives alone in a jungle as an ascetic there 
will hardly arise any occasion for putting the virtues into practice. 
The Great Vow will be binding on him always, but if we may say 
so, will remain inoperative for want of opportunities for its practice. 

Not so in the case of Niyama which involves practices which 
have to be gone through regularly, day after day, whatever the 
circumstances in which the Sadhaka is placed. Even if he is living 
alone completely isolated from all social relationships the necessity 
for going through these practices will remain as great as when he 
was living in the busy haunts of men. 

Sauca: The first element of Niyama is Sauca or purity. Before 
we can understand how the problem of purifying our nature is to 
be tackled we should clarify our ideas with regard to purity. What 
is purity? According to the Togic philosophy the whole of the 
Universe, seen or unseen, is a manifestation of the Divine Life and 
pervaded by the Divine Consciousness. To the Enlightened sage or 
saint who has had the Divine vision everything from an atom to 
the livara of a Brahmanda is a vehicle of the Divine Life and there- 
fore pure and sacred. From this higher point of view nothing 
can therefore be considered impure in the absolute sense. So, 
when we use the words pure and impure in relation to our life we 
obviously use them in a relative sense. The word purity is used 
in relation to our vehicles, not only the body which we can cognize 
with our physical senses but also the superphysical vehicles which 
serve as the instruments of emotion, thought and other spiritual 



222 



SECTION H (32) 



faculties. A thing is pure in relation to a vehicle if it enables or 
helps the vehicle to serve efficiently as an instrument of the Divine 
Life expressing through it at the particular stage of evolution. It 
is impure if it hinders the full expression of that life or offers 
impediments in the exercise of the vehicle's functions. Purity is, 
therefore, nothing absolute, only functional and related to the 
next stage of evolution which life is seeking to attain. Purification, 
therefore, means elimination from the vehicles belonging to an 
individual of all those elements and conditions which prevent 
them from exercising their proper functions and attaining the goal 
in view. For the Yogi this goal is Self-realization through the 
merging of his individual consciousness with, the Consciousness of 
the Supreme or the attainment of Kaivalya in terms of the Yoga- 
sutra. Purification for the Yogi, therefore, means specifically the 
maintenance and transformation of the vehicle in such a manner 
that they can serve increasingly to bring about this unification. 

Purity, though it is functional, depends to a great extent upon 
the quality of the material of which a particular vehicle of con- 
sciousness is composed. The functional efficiency of the vehicle 
depends not only upon its structural organization but also upon 
the nature of the material incorporated in it. The expression of 
consciousness through a vehicle may be compared to the produc- 
tion of different kinds of sounds by a piece of stretched metallic 
wire. We know that the sound which is produced depends upon 
three factors, the nature of the metal, the structure (diameter and 
length) of the wire and the tension to which it is subjected. In 
the same way the capacity of a vehicle to respond to different 
states of consciousness depends upon its material, its structural 
complexity which increases as a result of evolution, and its 
sensitiveness. 

The reason why the material of the vehicle determines to a 
certain extent its vibrational capacity lies in the fact that quality 
of material and vibrational capacity are indissolubly linked in 
nature, each kind of material responding to a limited range of 
vibrations. So, if we want to bring down into the lower vehicles 
the high and subtle vibrations corresponding to the deeper layers 
of human consciousness we must provide in them the right and 
corresponding type of material. 



SADHANA PADA 



223 



All the lower vehicles of a Jivatma are constantly changing 
and purification consists in gradually and systematically replacing 
the comparatively coarse material of the bodies by a more refined 
type of material. In the case of the physical body purification is 
a comparatively simple matter and may be brought about by 
supplying to the body the right kind of material in the form of 
food and drink. According to the Hindu system of Yogic culture 
foods and drinks are divided into three classes — Tdmasic, Rdjasic 
and Sattvic and only those which are considered Sdttvic are allowed 
to the Yogi who is building a pure and refined physical vehicle. 
Meat, alcohol and sq many other accessories of a modern diet 
make the physical body utterly useless for the Yogic life and if the 
aspirant has been coarsening the body through the use of these he 
will have to go through a prolonged period of careful dieting to 
get rid of the undesirable material and make the body sufficiently 
refined. 

The purification of the subtler vehicles which serve as 
instruments for the expression of thoughts and emotions is brought 
about by a different and more difficult process. In their case 
the vibrational tendencies are gradually changed by exclud- 
ing all undesirable thoughts and emotions from the mind and 
replacing these constantly and persistently by thoughts and emo- 
tions of a higher and subtler nature. As the vibrational tenden^ 
cies of these bodies change the matter of the bodies also changes 
pari passu and after some time, if the effort is continued long 
enough, the vehicles are adequately purified. The test of real 
purification is provided by the normal vibrational tendencies 
which one finds in the vehicle. A pure mind easily and naturally 
thinks pure thoughts and feels pure emotions and it becomes 
difficult for it to entertain undesirable thoughts and emotions in 
the same way as it is difficult for an impure mind to entertain 
high and noble thoughts and emotions. 

Another device recommended in the Hindu system of spiritual 
culture for the purification of the subtler vehicles is the constant 
use of Mantras and prayers. These make the vehicles vibrate 
frequently at very high rates of frequency, bring about an influx 
of spiritual forces from the planes above and the agitation thus set 
in motion, day after day, gradually washes out, as it were, all the 



224 



SECTION n (32) 



undesirable elements from the different vehicles. It will be seen, 
therefore, that purification or Sauca is a positive practice. It does 
not take place of itself. One has to go through purificatory 
exercises, day after day, for long periods of time. That is why it 
has been included in-Jfiyama. 

Semites a: The second element of Jfiyama is Satptosa which is 
generally translated as contentment. It is necessary for the 
aspirant for the Yogic life to cultivate contentment of the highest 
order because without it there is no possibility of keeping the mind 
in a condition of equilibrium. The ordinary man living in the 
world is subjected all day long to all kinds of impacts, and he 
reacts to these impacts according to his habits, prejudices, training 
or mood of the moment, according to his nature as we say. These 
reactions involve in most cases greater or lesser disturbances of the 
mind, there being hardly any reaction which is not accompanied 
by a ruffling of the feeling or the mind. The disturbance from 
one impact has hardly had time to subside before another impact 
throws it out of equilibrium again. The mind seems to be 
apparently calm sometimes but this calmness is only superficial. 
Beneath the surface there is an undercurrent of disturbance like 
the swell in a superficially calm sea. 

This condition of mind which need not necessarily be unplea- 
sant and which is taken as natural by most people is not at all 
conducive to one-pointedness and as long as it lasts must result 
in Viksepa, the strong tendency of the mind to be outward-turned. 
So the Sadhaka has to change this state of constant disturbance 
into a state of constant equilibrium and stillness by a deliberate 
exercise of the will, meditation and other means that may be 
available. He aims at attaining a condition in which he remains 
perfectly calm and serene whatever may happen in the outer 
world or even in the inner world of his mind. His aim is not 
merely to acquire the power to quell a mental disturbance 
if and when it arises but the more rare power to prevent any 
disturbance taking place at all. He knows that once a disturb- 
ance has been allowed to occur it takes far more energy to 
overcome it completely and, even though outwardly it may dis- 
appear quickly, the inner sub-conscious disturbance persists for a 
long time. 



SADHANA PADA 



225 



This kind of equanimity can be built only on the foundations 
of perfect contentment, the capacity to remain satisfied whatever 
may happen to the Sadhaka. It is an extremely positive and 
dynamic condition of the mind which has nothing in common 
with that negative mentality which is based on laziness and lack 
of initiative and which is rightly held in profound contempt by 
people in the world. It is based on perfect indifference to all 
those personal enjoyments, comforts and other considerations 
which sway mankind. Its object is the attainment of that 
Peace which takes one completely beyond the realm of illusion 
and misery. 

The cultivation of this supreme contentment and consequent 
tranquillity of the mind is the result of prolonged self-discipline 
and going through many experiences which involve pain and 
suffering. It cannot be acquired by a mere assertion of the will 
once for all. Habits stronger than nature and habits developed 
through innumerable lives cannot be changed all at once. That 
is why constant alertness and training of the mind in maintaining 
the right attitude is necessary and that is also why this virtue is 
placed under Jfiyama. 

Tapas and the next two elements of JVtyaw? have : already been 
referred to in II-l and the reason why they together are called 
Kriya-Yoga has been given in dealing with that Sutra. Tapas is a 
very comprehensive term and has really no exact English equiva- 
lent. It combines in itself the significations of a number of English 
words: purification, self-discipline, austerity. The word stands 
for a class of various practices the object of which is to purify 
and discipline the lower nature and to bring the vehicles of the 
Jivatmd under the control of an iron will. The meaning of the 
word is probably derived from the process of subjecting alloyed 
gold to strong 'heating' whereby all the dross is burnt off and 
pure gold is left behind. In a way the whole science of character- 
building whereby we purify and bring under control our lower 
vehicles may be considered as a practice of Tapas but in the 
orthodox sense the word Tapas is used particularly for some 
specific exercises adopted for the purification and control of the 
physical body and the development of will-power. These include 
such practices as fasting, observing vows of various kinds, 
15 



226 



SECTION n (32) 



Prdnaydma etc. Some misguided people take the most extraordinary 
vows in practising Tapas such as holding up the hand and keeping it 
in that position for a number of years even though it withers. 
But such foolish practices are considered highly reprehensible in 
the enlightened schools of Toga and are called Asuric, demoniacal. 

The systematic practice of Tapas generally begins with simple 
and easy exercises which require the exertion of will-power and is 
continued by progressive stages with more difficult exercises, the 
object of which is to bring about the dissociation of the vehicle 
from consciousness. In the case of the ordinary man the con- 
sciousness is to a great extent identified with the vehicle through 
which it works. The practice of Tapas gradually loosens up this 
association, enables the consciousness to be partially separated 
from the vehicle and this progressive awareness of the vehicle as 
part of the ' not-Self ' means attenuation of ' Asmitd ' or ' I am 
this ' consciousness. It is only when this power to dissociate 
consciousness from the vehicles has been acquired to some extent 
that the Sadhaka can effectively purify and control the vehicles 
and use them for the purposes of Toga. 

Svadhyaya: The word Svadhyaya is sometimes used in a limited 
sense for the study of the sacred scriptures. But this is only a 
part of the work which has to be done — the first step. The student 
has naturally first to make himself thoroughly familiar with all 
the essential literature bearing on the different aspects of Toga 
just as he does in the study of any science. In this way he 
acquires the necessary knowledge of the theoretical principles 
and practices which are involved in the pursuit of the Togic ideal. 
He also gets an idea of the relative values of the different methods 
and a correct perspective with regard to all matters connected 
with Togic practices. 

While this study is only theoretical and does not take him very 
far on the road to Self-realization it is none the less of great value to 
the student. Many people who set out on this quest have a very 
vague and confused intellectual background and lack that clear 
and broad grasp of the subject which is so necessary for steady 
progress. Being insufficiently equipped with the necessary knowl- 
edge concerning the various problems which are involved they are 
apt to over-simplify these problems and to expect impossible 



SADHANA PADA 



227 



results. Sooner or later they become disheartened and frustrated 
or fall a prey to those unscrupulous people who pose as great 
Togis and promise all kinds of fantastic things to entice people into 
their fold. A broad and general intellectual background is 
necessary for achieving success in any sphere of scientific endeavour 
and since Toga is a science par excellence it is true of this 
science also. 

But though a thorough and detailed study of Togic literature 
is a necessary part of Svadhyaya it is only the first step. The next 
is constant brooding and reflection over the deeper problems 
which have been studied in their intellectual aspect through books, 
etc. This constant reflection prepares the mind for the reception 
of real knowledge from within. It produces a sort of suctorial 
action and draws the breath of intuition into the mind. The 
student thus begins to get a deeper insight into the problems of 
Togic life. The clearer the insight into these problems the keener 
becomes the desire for the real solution, for gaining that trans- 
cendent knowledge in the light of which all doubts are completely 
resolved and the Peace of the Eternal is attained. This brooding 
and reflection on the great and fundamental truths of life 
gradually and imperceptibly begins to take the form of meditation 
in the ordinary sense of the term, that is, the mind becomes 
increasingly engrossed in the object of the search. This object 
need not necessarily be an abstract truth of a philosophical nature. 
It may be an object of devotion with whom the Sadhaka wants to 
commune and become united. The nature of the object will 
differ according to the temperament of the individual but the 
condition of the mind — a state of deep absorption and intense 
desire to know — will be the same, more or less. 

In bringing about this one-pointed state of absorption the use 
of Mantras is very helpful. The Sadhaka may use the Mantra of 
his Isfa-Devatd or any of the well-known Mantras like Gayatri or 
Pranava. These Mantras, as has been shown already, harmonize 
the lower vehicles of consciousness, make them sensitive to the 
subtler vibrations and ultimately bring about a partial fusion of 
the lower and higher consciousness. So, it will be seen that though 
Svddhy lya begins with intellectual study it must be carried through 
the progressive stages of reflection, meditation, Tapas etc. to the 



228 



SECTION II (32) 



point where the Sddhaka is able to gain all knowledge or devotion 
from within, by his own efforts. That is the significance of the 
prefix Sva in Svadhydya, He leaves all external aids such as books, 
discourses, etc. and dives into his own mind for everything he needs 
in his quest. 

Isvara-pranidhdna: This is usually translated as resignation to 
Isvara or God but in view of the fact that the advanced practice of 
Isvara-pranidhdna is able to bring about Samddki, it is obvious that 
the word is used in a far deeper sense than the superficial mental 
effort of the ordinary religious man to resign himself to the will of 
God. When such a man makes a mental assertion of this kind 
what he really means is that the will of God is supreme in the 
world over which He rules and he submits to that will gladly, 
although the experience which has evoked that assertion may not 
be a pleasant one. This attitude is not unlike the attitude of a 
loyal subject to the fiat of his king. 

It is clear, however, that though this attitude of the pious 
individual is superior to the common attitude of resentment to- 
wards the inevitable calamities and sufferings of life and conduces 
to a peaceful state of mind, it cannot by itself take him very far 
along the path of spiritual unfoldment and realization which 
culminates in Samddhi. The fact that the progressive practice of 
Isvara-pranidhdna can ultimately lead to Samadhi shows definitely 
that it signifies a much deeper process of transformation in the 
Sddhaka than a mere acceptance of whatever experiences and 
ordeals come to him in the course of his life. 

To understand the significance and technique of Isvara- 
pranidhdna it is necessary to recall how the Purusa gets involved in 
Prakrti through Avidyd which results in his becoming subject to 
illusion and consequent sufferings and miseries of life. As this 
question has been discussed thoroughly in dealing with the theory 
of Klesas it is not necessary to go into its details here, but 
there is one central idea bearing on the problem under considera- 
tion which may be briefly referred to in this connection. According 
to the philosophy upon which the Science of Toga is based, the 
Reality within us is free from the fundamental illusion which is 
responsible for the limitations and miseries of our life. The in- 
dividual consciousness or Purusa is a manifestation of that Reality. 



SADHANA P&DA 



229 



How does he then become subject to the Great Illusion and the 
consequent sufferings of the lower life? By the imposition of the 
' I ' consciousness which makes him identify himself with his 
vehicles and with the environment in which his consciousness is 
immersed. As long as this veil of Asmitd or ' I '-ness covers his 
true nature — Svarupa — he remains bound by the limitations and 
illusions of life and the only way in which he can regain his free- 
dom from them is by removing this covering of ' I ' consciousness. 
This is the basic idea underlying the whole philosophy of Yoga 
and all systems of Toga aim at the destruction of this ' I ' con- 
sciousness directly or indirectly, by one means or another. The 
practice of ISvara-pranidhdna is one of such means. It has for its 
object the dissolution of Asmitd by the systematic and progressive 
merging of the individual will with the Will of ISvara and thus 
destroying the very root of the Kleias. 

The practice of Ilvara-pranidhdna therefore begins with the 
mental assertion ' Not my will but Thy Will be done % but it does 
not end there. There is a steady effort to bring about a continu- 
ous recession of consciousness from the level of the personality 
which is the seat of I ' consciousness into the consciousness of the 
Supreme whose will is working out in, the manifested world. This 
effort may take many forms according to the temperament and 
previous Samskaras of the Sddhaka. There may be an earnest 
desire to become a conscious instrument of the Supreme Will 
which is finding expression in the unfolding of the manifested 
Universe. This Will finds obstruction in its expression at the 
human level owing to the limitations of the personality, the greater 
the egoism the greater the obscuration and the consequent obstruc- 
tion. Such a Sddhaka who is trying to practise livara-pranidhana 
tries to remove this obstruction of the personality by doing Niskama- 
Karma, so that his personality may become a willing and conscious 
instrument of the Divine Will. It is needless to say that this is a 
gradual process and for a long time the Sddhaka has to work, as it 
were, in the dark, trying to do scrupulously what he thinks to be 
right without having any conscious knowledge of the Divine Will. 
It is, however, not necessary to know the Divine Will until the 
personality has been brought under control, for even if that Will 
were known the wayward and uncontrolled personality will not 



230 



SECTION n (32,33) 



allow it to be expressed freely and fully. But as in all processes 
of this nature the effort to realize an ideal gradually removes the 
obstructions in the way of realization and if the Sadhaka pursues 
his ideal with perseverance he succeeds in becoming a conscious 
agent of the Divine. His false lower 'I' disappears arid the 
Divine Will can work freely through the ' I '-less centre of his con- 
sciousness. This is real Karma-Toga. 

The practice of Iivata-pranidhdna takes a different form if the 
Sadhaka is a person with a highly emotional temperament and is 
treading the path of Bhakti. Here the emphasis is not on the 
merging of the individual will in the Divine Will but on the union 
with the Beloved through love. But as love naturally expresses 
itself in self-abnegation and subordination of personal desires to 
the Will of the Beloved the path of Bhakti also leads indirectly to 
the dissolution of the ' I ' or Asmitd. Here it is love which is the 
driving force and which brings about the destruction of egoism 
and fusion of consciousness and Samadhi is the result. 

The careful student will be able to see in ISvara-pranidhdna the 
essence of Bhakti-Togd. It is thought by many students of the 
system of Toga outlined in the Toga-Sutras that there is not much 
of a place for a Bhakta in this system, and Bhakti has not been 
given the weight it deserves considering its importance iri spiritual 
culture. It is true that the manner in which the subject has been 
dealt with by Patanjali does give that impression, but does not 
Isvara-pranidhdna contain in a nutshell the whole essential technique 
of Bhakti-Toga? Navadha-Bhaktx 'which comprises the practical side 
of Bhakti- Toga is merely of a preparatory nature and it is meant 
to lead the Sadhaka to the stage where he is able to renounce all 
external aids and to surrender himself completely to the Will, of 
the Lord and depend upon Him completely for everything. Surely, 
this advanced technique of spiritual culture and ultimate union 
with the Beloved in Samadhi is nothing but Is vara-pranidhana. 



33. Pc*d+«nsi3" srfawHicH^ 1 



Vitarka-badhane pratipaksa-bhavanam . 



SADHANA PADA 



231 



fep# evil thoughts; evil passions 3rra^ on oppression by; on 
disturbance by sldMSf the opposites ?TFpPT dwelling (in mind) 
on; (constant) pondering over. 

33. When the mind is disturbed by improper 
thoughts constant pondering over the opposites (is the 
remedy). 

In dealing with the subject of Tama-Niydma, Patanjali has 
given two Sutras which are of great help to the practical student of 
Toga. The first of these which is being considered gives an 
effective method of dealing with the habits and tendencies which 
interfere with the practice of Tama-Niyama. The student who 
tries to practise Tama-Niyama brings with him the momentum of 
all kinds of tendencies from previous lives, and in spite of his 
resolve, the undesirable habits and tendencies in which he has 
indulged assert themselves strongly and force him to act, feel and 
think in ways which go against his ideals. What is he to do under 
these circumstances? He should ponder constantly over the oppo- 
sites of the undesirable tendencies when these latter trouble him. 
In this Sutra the author has given one of the most important laws 
of character-building, a law which modern psychology recognizes 
and recommends in dealing with problems of self-culture. 

The rationale of this technique for overcoming bad habits 
and undesirable tendencies, whether they relate to action, feeling 
or thinking lies in the fact that all evil tendencies are rooted in 
wrong habits of thought and attitudes and, therefore, the only 
effective means of removing them completely and permanently is 
to attack the trouble at its source and alter the thoughts and 
attitudes which underlie the undesirable manifestations. 

As is well known, an undesirable mental habit can be 
changed only by replacing it by a mental habit of an exactly 
opposite kind — hatred by love, dishonesty by uprightness. New 
and desirable mental channels are created by the new thoughts in 
which mental energy begins to flow in ever increasing measure, 
starving and gradually replacing the undesirable habits of thoughts 
and the wrong attitudes which are derived from them. The 



232 



SECTION n (33, 34) 



amount of mental energy required and the time taken will depend 
naturally upon the strength of the undesirable habit and the will- 
power of the Sadhaka, but if he puts his heart into the work and 
perseveres the thing can be done. 

Vitarka himsadayah krta-karitanumodita 
lobha-krodha-moha-purvaka mrdu- 
madhyadhimatra duhkhajnanananta- 
phala iti pratipaksa-bhavanam. 

ffla^f ev il or improper thoughts and emotions [^HI<W: (of) 
violence, etc. f^r done by self <t>|ftd done through others sppft- 
f^TT: (and) abetted; approved 5Tt*T greed; avarice ^pfET anger jft^ 
confusion; delusion ^4*T: preceded by; caused by ij| mild *rs*T 
medium arflPTraT: (and) intense 5:^" pain ; misery afRTPT ignorance 
<*ii«n endless 'fi^rr: fruit; result ^fir thus; so; in this way yRjMJH 
(on) the opposites *n^PT dwelling in mind. 

34. As improper thoughts, emotions (and actions) 
such as those of violence etc., whether they are done 
(indulged in), caused to be done or abetted, whether 
caused by greed, anger or delusion, whether present in 
mild, medium or intense degree, result in endless pain 
and ignorance; so there is the necessity of pondering 
over the opposites. 

In this Sutra Patanjali has given a brilliant analysis of the 
factors which are involved in this gradual transformation of 
undesirable into desirable tendencies and modern psychology 
should incorporate the many valuable ideas given in this Sutra in 
its system of ethics. This Sutra is a typical example of the vast 



SADHANA PADA 



233 



and varied information which can be condensed in the few words 
of a Sutra and made readily available to the practical student. 
The first factor we have to deal with in relation to the evil 
tendencies which are sought to be overcome by Yama-Niyama, is 
the question of instrumentality. 

Instrumentality: Evil action may be (a) done directly, , (ft) 
caused to be done through the agency of another, (c) be connived 
at or approved. Common law takes cognizance of and recognizes 
responsibility in case of (a) and (ft) but not in(c). But according 
to the ethics of Toga, blame attaches to all three types of evil 
actions, there being only a question of degree. The man who 
sees a thief breaking into a house but does not do anything to 
prevent the crime is partly responsible for the crime and will to 
that extent have to bear the Karmic result and degradation of 
character. 

It is desirable to have clear ideas with regard to this question 
because a very large number of people— good, honest people- 
manage to deceive themselves and ease their conscience by sup- 
posing that if they have not taken a direct part in an evil action 
they are quite free from blame. Thus, for example, in India 
many people would shrink with horror if they were asked to 
slaughter a goat and yet they allow themselves to believe that they 
incur no Karmic responsibility in taking meat because it is the 
butcher who kills the goat. This illustrates incidentally the 
enormous capacity for self-deception in the case of human beings 
where their prejudices come in or where their self-indulgences 
are at stake. 

But more noteworthy than this doing of evil action indirectly 
is perhaps the third way of participating in it. We sometimes 
witness a crime but owing to callousness or desire to avoid getting 
into trouble do nothing about it or may even silently approve of 
it. We assume that because we have not taken any part — direct 
or indirect — in the crime we are quite free from blame. But it is 
not so according to the Togic ethics embodied in Yama-Niyama. 
According to the more stringent rules of Togic morality a man who 
connives at or is indifferent to a crime being done in his presence 
in which, from common humaneness he should have interfered is 
partly guilty of the crime. ' Inaction in a deed of; mercy is 



234 



SECTION II (34) 



action in a deadly sin ' as the Buddha warned. If, for example, 
we see a person being lynched or a child or animal being treated 
very cruelly it is our duty to interfere whatever the consequences 
to ourselves. And if we save our skin by remaining indifferent or 
inactive we incur responsibility and invite Kdrmic retribution. Of 
coursey this does not mean that we have to become a nuisance and 
like a busy-body interfere constantly in the lives of other people 
with the object of getting wrongs redressed. Togic life does not 
mean bidding goodrbye to reason and commonsense. 

Cause: The next factor we have to consider is the cause of the 
evil tendencies which hinder us in the practice of Yama-JHyama. 
Patanjali has given three causes— greed, anger and delusion. It 
should be noted that these three are conditions of mind which 
precede wrong thoughts, feelings and actions. This is indicated 
by the word Puruaka. Lobha is the condition of the mind which 
produces the desire to grasp things for ourselves. Krodha is the 
agitation of the mind produced when any person or thing stands 
in the way of fulfilment of our desire. Aloha is the conditioning 
of the mind which results when we are attached to any person 
or thing. All these conditions of the mind bring about a clouding 
of Buddhi which renders a person incapable of judging right and 
wrong. It is this confused and unenlightened state of the mind 
which provides the necessary soil for wrong thoughts, feelings and 
actions. That is why pondering over the opposites and thus 
clearing up the confusion has been prescribed as the remedy in the 
previous Sutra. What has to be remembered is that we have to 
go to the root of the evil and tackle it there. 

Degree : The next question to be considered in regard to 
Vitarka is that' of degree. In the Hindu philosophical systems 
the usual method of classifying a number of things which differ 
in degree or intensity is to Consider them under three broad sub- 
heads — mild, medium and intense. This method of sub-division 
is simple and elastic though naturally it suffers from lack of 
definiteness. But as the Sadhaka has to free himself completely 
from these evil tendencies this lack of definiteness in the division 
is not of any practical importance. 

The importance of sub-dividing the degree or intensity of 
Vitarka does not lie in providing a scientific method of classification. 



SADHANA PADA 



235 



Its real object is to bring home to the Sadhaka the importance 
of attending to the minor faults in his thinking and conduct 
which he is likely to overlook or ignore. The Sadhaka has to 
develop a high degree of scrupulousness with regard to his 
thoughts, feelings and actions which is generally lacking in people 
who strive to lead a moral life. It is, in fact, this meticulous 
attention to our inner and outer life which produces moral per- 
fection and brings about those results which are mentioned in 
the eleven Sutras beginning with 11-35. 

It should be borne in mind that the subtler forms of an evil 
tendency do not reveal themselves to us unless and until the 
grosser ones have been eliminated. So, this complete elimination 
of any particular kind of Vitarka will seem to be continually 
receding and it may appear to the aspirant that he can never 
acquire the perfection for which he is striving. But far better 
this riever-get-done feeling than the easy complacence which is 
fatal for the man who is treading the path of Toga. The results in 
which the practice of different elements of Yama-Niyama culminate 
(11-35-45), can always enable the Sadhaka to check his progress 
and to know definitely whether he has completed the task of 
developing any particular trait. 

Result: The last point dealt with in this Sutra is the result of 
the tendencies which are sought to be eradicated by practising 
Yama-Niyama. The two inevitable consequences of an undisciplined 
and unrighteous life are Duhkha and AjMna, pain and ignorance — 
both words being used not only- in their ordinary sense but also in 
their more comprehensive philosophical sense. The word Duhkha 
is used in Togic philosophy not only for the ordinary pains and 
sufferings which are the Karmic results of evil thoughts and deeds 
but also for that general unhappiness which pervades all human 
life and which really poisons even the best and happiest periods 
of our existence. This point has been discussed thoroughly in 
11-15 and we need not go into it again here. In the same 
way Ajnana means not only the confusion of mind and lack 
of wisdom which result from our evil tendencies but also 
the lack of that fundamental knowledge of our true Divine 
nature which is responsible for our bondage and suffering in 
human life. 



236 



SECTION II (34) 



Dajjkha and Ajndna are thus the two general and inevitable 
results of a life which is not fashioned according to the ideals 
embodied in Yama-Niyama. All the undesirable tendencies in our 
character produce an endless {Ananta) series of causes and effects 
which keep the soul in bondage and consequently in misery. The 
only method of escape from this vicious circle of causes and effects 
which is available to a human being is, first to discipline his lower 
nature according to the ideals of Yama-Niyama and then, treading 
the further stages of the path of Yoga, to gain Enligh tenment . That 
is the real reason why Yama-Niyama should be practised to per- 
fection and all Vitarka should be removed by * pondering over 
the opposites '. 

It may be worth while mentioning here that although 
the ten elements included in Yama-Niyama have been men- 
tioned specifically and haVe to be practised separately we 
should not forget the unity underlying human nature. Our 
nature, though it seems to have different facets, is essentially one. 
We cannot, therefore, divide life in water-tight compartments and 
practise the different elements of Yama-Niyama one by one as if 
each had an independent existence and could be isolated from the 
others. The fact is that all these elements are closely inter-related 
and the qualities which they are meant to develop are the different 
aspects of our inner life. How far we are able to develop one of 
the qualities will depend to a great extent upon the general tone 
of our life. No one can practise Ahimsdj for example, even if he 
tries his best, if he neglects the other elements of Yama-Niyama, so 
closely is one part of our nature bound up with the other parts. 
All parts of our nature hang together and we rise and fall as a 
whole, to a very great extent. So, it is the general quality of our 
life and moral nature which has to be improved, step by step, 
though we may concentrate on different qualities for some time. 
The value of a diamond depends upon the quality of the stone as 
a whole and not upon the polish of one facet. But in order to 
produce a finished gem we have to take up the different facets 
one by one. 

It may also be interesting to enquire why the word Vitarka 
is used for those improper thoughts which are sought to be exclud- 
ed from the mind in the practice of Yama-Niyama. The word 



SADHANA PADA 



237 



Vitarka is used to indicate a state of mind in which it passes from 
one alternative to another as shown in dealing with 1-42. This 
state is also present in the earlier stages when a person tries to live 
according to an ideal. There is always vacillation and struggle 
and the mind hovers between two alternative courses. It is only 
when the Sddhaka is well established in righteousness by doing the 
right under all circumstances that this Vitarka ceases and he invari- 
ably does the right thing unhesitatingly. The student will thus 
see the appropriateness of the usevof the word Vitarka in the present 
context. 



3*. ^r^ l ^fd^A l ^i d^'fas ft ^<<SJhl : I 

Ahirnsa-pratisthayam tat-samnidhau vaira- 
tyagah. 

3)^1 (in) non-violence Mfd^AMlH on being firmly established 
cRT-^fafcfl in his {Yogi's) vicinity #T of hostility ^TTT: abandon- 
ment. 

35. On being firmly established in non-violence 
there is abandonment of hostility in (his) presence. 

In this and the subsequent ten Sutras Patafijali gives the 
specific results of practising the ten elements of Yama-Niyama. The 
purpose of pointing out these accomplishments which mark the 
culmination of the practice of Yama-Niyama, is two-fold. In the 
first place, it serves to emphasize that the virtue has to be develop- 
ed or the practice has to be carried on to a high degree of perfec- 
tion. Too many people begin to imagine they have acquired 
perfection in the development of a particular virtue while they are 
still at the initial stage. In the second place, by indicating the 
nature of the developments which take place when the virtue has 
been acquired in perfection, the author provides a measuring rod 
for the Sddhaka by which he can judge his progress and. know 
definitely when he has succeeded in accomplishing that particular 
task. It need hardly be pointed out that these extraordinary 



238 



SECTION II (35) 



developments are not based on pious hopes but strict, scientific 
laws verified by innumerable Yogis and saints. The results follow 
as surely though not so easily as the production of fruit from a sap- 
ling planted in the ground and nurtured carefully. But, of course, 
as in all scientific experiments, the correct conditions must be 
provided if the desired results are to be obtained. Whether it is 
necessary for the Sddhaka to develop each quality to the degree 
indicated in the Sutras is another question, but there should be no 
doubt that the thing can be done. 

The student of Yogic philosophy will see in these unusual 
developments which take place on practising Yama-Niyama the 
tremendous possibilities which lie hidden in the apparently simple 
things of life. It appears that one has only to penetrate deeply 
into any manifestation of life to encounter the most fascinating 
mysteries and sources of power. Physical science which deals with 
the crudest manifestation of life touches the mere fringe of these 
mysteries and the results which it has achieved are little short of 
miraculous. There is, therefore, nothing to be surprised at in the 
fact that the Yogi who dives into the far subtler phenomena of 
mind and consciousness finds still deeper mysteries and extra- 
ordinary powers. This point will be made clearer when we deal 
with the question of Siddhis. 

11-35 gives the specific result of developing Ahimsd. This 
is what should be expected if Ahimsd is a positive and dynamic 
quality of universal love and not a mere negative attitude to 
harmlessness. An individual who has developed Ahimsd carries 
about him an invisible aura surcharged with love and compassion 
even though these may not be expressed at the emotional level. 
Also, because love is the power which binds together in a spiritual 
union all the separated fragments of the One Life, any individual 
who is imbued with such love is inwardly attuned to all living 
creatures and automatically inspires confidence and love in them. 
That is how the violent and hateful vibrations of those who come 
near the Yogi are for the time being over-powered by the much 
stronger vibrations of love and kindness emanating from him and 
even beasts of prey become harmless and docile for the time bein°-. 
Of course, when a creature goes out of the immediate influence 
of such a Yogi its normal nature is bound to assert itself but even 



SApHANA PADA 



239 



this brief contact is likely to leave a permanent mark on it and 
uplift it a little. 

Satya-pratisthayarft kriya-phalasrayatvam. 

SRJT (in) truthfulness nfdtxiWm on being firmly established 
foqT (of) action TwT fruit; result 3TT«ra^»T state of being a 
substratum. 

36. On being firmly established in truthfulness 
fruit (of action) rests on action (of the Yogi) only. 

This Sutra, giving the result of acquiring perfect truthfulness, 
requires some explanation. The apparent meaning of the Sutra 
is that in the case of a Yogi who has acquired this virtue in perfec- 
tion the fruit of any action that he may do follows unfailingly. 
For example, if he says something, concerning the future then the 
event predicted must take place according to his prediction. This 
has been interpreted by many commentators in a rather absurd 
manner and all the laws of Nature are supposed to be capable of 
being violated to uphold the fiats of such a person. For example, 
if he says that the Sun will not set in the evening then the move- 
ment of the earth will stop to make his words effective. Stories 
in the Purdnas which in most cases are mere allegories are taken 
in a literal sense in support of such a view. 

It is, however, not necessary to push the meaning of this Sutra 
to the logical and absurd conclusion in this manner provided we 
understand its underlying significance. Let us see. 

When an ordinary man says or does anything with the object 
of achieving any definite result, the thing aimed at may or may 
not materialize. Of course, any intelligent person with full 
knowledge of all the relevant conditions can predict the result to 
a great extent, but no one can be quite sure because there are 
many unforeseen circumstances in the future which may affect 
the course of events. Only he can predict the result with cer- 
tainty whose Buddhi is developed and purified sufficiently to 



240 



SECTION H (36, 37) 



reflect the Universal Mind in which the past, present and future 
can be seen to a great extent. Now, as has been said already the 
practice of truthfulness develops and purifies Buddhi in a remark- 
able manner and the mind of a person who has acquired per- 
fection in this virtue becomes like a mirror reflecting the Divine 
Mind to some extent* He has become, as it were, a mirror of 
Truth and whatever he says or does reflects at least partially that 
Truth. Naturally, whatever such a person says will come true; 
whatever he attempts to accomplish will be accomplished. But 
why ' the fruit rests on action ' in the case of such a person is not 
due to the fact that God changes the course of events and allows 
violation of natural laws in order to fulfil his words and resolu- 
tions, but because the words and actions of such a man merely 
reflect God's will and anticipate what is to happen in the future. 
Taken in this light the meaning of the Sutra becomes quite 
intelligible and it is possible to avoid the absurd assumption that 
the Divine Order in the Cosmos can be upset by the whims and 
decisions of a perfectly truthful person. It is contended that if 
such a person says something even by mistake that thing must 
materialize at any cost. This idea is based upon the assumption 
that such a person can be careless and irresponsible like ordinary 
people of the world. One who has developed truthfulness to such 
a high degree must have acquired previously the capacity to weigh 
every word that comes out of his mouth and to say whatever he 
has to say deliberately and of set purpose. 

Asteya-pratisthayam sarva-ratnopasthanam. 

src^Hr (in) honesty; non-misappropriativeness MfdNbHi on 
being firmly established ^ (of) all ToT gems; precious things 
•d4*qHH self-presentation; coming up. 

37. On being firmly established in honesty all 
kinds of gems present themselves (before the Togi). 



SADHANA PAD A 



241 



' All kinds of gems present themselves ' does not mean that 
precious stones begin to fly through the air and fall at his feet. 
It is a way of saying that he becomes aware of all kinds of 
treasures in his vicinity. For example, if he is passing through a 
jungle he becomes cognizant of any treasure buried in the 
neighbourhood or any mine of precious gems which may be 
present underground. This cognizance may be of the nature of 
clairvoyance or mere intuitional awareness like the one possessed 
by water-diviners. 

As long as we have in us the tendency to misappropriate or 
grasp things which do not belong to us we are governed by the 
ordinary laws of Nature. When we have risen above this tendency 
completely and would not even think of taking anything even if 
a treasure were to fall within our grasp, then we rise, as it were, 
above the law which confines us strictly to the limited means 
allotted to us by our Karma. Then people around us offer their 
wealth at our feet, we become mysteriously aware of all kinds of 
hidden treasures and mines of precious stones hidden within the 
bowels of the earth. But all this is useless now, for us. We can 
take nothing for ourselves. When we are bound by the ordinary 
desires for wealth etc. We have to earn everything by adopting the 
ordinary means. When we have conquered those desires the 
ordinary laws are no longer binding on us. 

Brahmacarya-pratisthayam virya-labhah. 

fT^PFT (in) sexual continence ilRt^il-41-H on being firmly 
established ^q - (of) vigour; energy 5TTR": gain. 

38. On being firmly established in sexual conti- 
nence vigour (is) gained. 

Virya which is translated as vigour does not mean merely 
physical vigour which no doubt results from the conservation of 
sexual energy. Virya is connected with our whole constitution 
16 



242 



SECTION n (38) 



and refers to that vitality which makes all its parts vibrant, so 
that all weakness, laxity and inadequacy disappear and are replaced 
by extraordinary resilience, strength and energy. It appears as 
if there is an influx of tremendous vitality from the higher planes 
imparting vigour and strength to every vehicle which it touches. 

It is worth while referring here to one interesting fact in con- 
nection with the conservation of sexual energy which is involved 
in Brahmacarya. It is a well-known doctrine of Togic philosophy 
that there is a very intimate relation between sexual energy and 
the energy which is required for bringing about the mental, moral 
and spiritual regeneration aimed at in Togic discipline. In fact 
the sexual energy may be considered to be only a gross form of this 
subtler energy which is called Ojas. As long as the sex life continues 
much of this special kind of available energy in the body is used up 
in this manner. But after Brahmacarya has been well established the 
possibility opens for the utilization of the conserved energy for the 
various changes which the Sadhaka is trying to bring about in his 
body and mind. The current of energy which had previously 
been kept directed to the sexual regions and was being exhausted 
in sexual indulgence can now be utilized for the purposes men- 
tioned above. But this sublimation and diversion of this energy 
is possible only for those who have obtained a complete mastery 
of their sexual instincts and not merely abstained from indul- 
gence for some time. Such people who are able to conserve, 
transmute and direct this energy continuously towards the cere- 
brum are called Urdhva-retds, Urdhva meaning upwards and Retas 
meaning sexual energy. 

This complete control of sexual energy is acquired not merely 
by abstention from the sex act but also by a very strict and rigid 
control of thoughts and desires so that not the slightest thought 
or desire connected with sex or suggesting sex ever enters the 
mind of the Sadhaka. For this current of energy referred to above 
is extremely susceptible to thought and the slightest thoughts con- 
nected with sexual desires immediately stir up and direct the 
current to the sex organs. Brahmacarya, therefore, is not so much 
a matter of abstention from the sex act as a control of thoughts so 
complete that not the slightest stirring of our sex instincts is possi- 
ble at any time. It is only under such conditions that the grosser 



SADHANA PADA 



243 



energies of the body can be sublimated to serve the higher pur- 
poses of the soul. And the earlier in life we begin this self-disci- 
pline the easier it is to acquire this control. 

Aparigraha-sthairye janma-kathamta- 
sambodhah. 

SihRu^ (in) non-possessiveness **Hf on becoming steady or 
confirmed vjjtjt (of) birth tfrsRTT (of) the « how ' arid ' wherefore ' 
*i«Hy: knowledge. 

39. Non-possessiveness being confirmed there 
arises knowledge of the « how ' and « wherefore ' of 
existence. 

When perfection in Aparigraha is attained the Togi acquires 
the capacity to know the * how ' and ' wherefore ' of birth and death. 
Though there is no ambiguity with regard to the literal meaning 
of the Sutra and Janma-Kathamta is taken to mean knowledge of 
our previous births it is difficult to understand the underlying 
significance of this Sutra. Why should knowledge of his previous 
births arise in the case of a Togi who has conquered the instinct 
of possessiveness? To understand this enigma we have to recall 
the relation between the transitory personality which is formed 
anew with every incarnation and the permanent individuality 
which is the root of every personality and which persists through 
the succession of incarnations. Now, the personality works in the 
lowest three worlds with a new set of bodies which are formed 
with each successive incarnation. Since these bodies perish one 
after another at the end of each incarnation and have not passed 
through the experiences of previous lives, there are no impressions 
(Samskdras) in them relating to these experiences. And since 
memory depends upon the existence of impressions relating to an 
experience, naturally, there is no memory of those experiences and 
the whole of the long past stretching through hundreds of lives is 



244 



SECTION II (39} 



a perfect blank to the personality. But, as has been pointed out 
already, the individuality wears ' immortal ' bodies which have 
passed through all those experiences and carry with them their 
corresponding impressions. So the Jivatmd or individuality having 
a permanent record of experiences in the subtler vehicles has a 
detailed memory of all the experiences. 

It should be easy to understand that if somehow these im- 
pressions can be contacted and the corresponding memories 
brought down in the lower vehicles of the present personality, 
knowledge of experiences gone through in previous lives should 
become available to the personality. This is what happens when 
Aparigraha is developed to a high degree of perfection. The 
essence of the personality is the ' I ' consciousness which in its 
turn is the result of the identification by consciousness with the 
things in our environment and with our lower vehicles including 
the physical body. The development of non-possessiveness frees 
us to a very great extent from this habit of identifying ourselves 
with our bodies and the things with which they are surrounded 
and thus loosens the bonds of the personality. The natural result of 
this loosening is that the centre of consciousness gradually shifts 
into the higher vehicles of the Jivatmd and the knowledge present in 
those vehicles is reflected more and more into the lower vehicles. 
So, although the lower vehicles have not gone through the experi- 
ences of the previous lives, this gradual fusion of the personality 
and the individuality results in the filtering down of some of this 
knowledge into the lower vehicles and thus enables the personality 
to share all this knowledge. This is how the practice of 
Aparigraha enables the Togi to have knowledge of previous births. 

The development of such an extraordinary power from the 
intensive practice of Aparigraha shows the importance of doing 
things with intensity. The secret of discovering the hidden and 
mysterious facts of life seems to lie in intensity of effort. We meet 
the phenomena of life superficially and so naturally do not get 
from them anything more than ordinary experiences. But the 
moment we do anything with great- intensity and try to penetrate 
into the deeper recesses of life we come across the most extra- 
ordinary results and experiences. The extraordinary results 
achieved by Science in the field of atomic research should have 



SADHANA PADA 



245 



brought home to us this great truth but we believe only in matter 
and consider the phenomena connected with the mind and con- 
sciousness as something intangible and therefore unreal. The 
truth of the matter, however, is that the mysteries, which are 
hidden in the realm of matter, are as nothing compared to the 
mysteries which are related to mind and consciousness. This is 
what the Science of Toga has proved. To the Togi who has 
obtained even a faint glimpse of these mysteries the remarkable 
achievements of Science in the realm of matter and force pale 
into insignificance and seem hardly worth bothering about. 

Saucat svanga-jugupsa parair asamsargah. 

yfHld from purity FTF^ (with) one's limbs, i.e. body *HJ4H 
disgust qr: with others 3RRPT: non-contact; non-intercourse. 

40. From physical purity (arises) disgust for one's 
own body and disinclination to come in physical 
contact with others. 

The results of developing purity are given in two Sutras, one 
relating to the purity of the physical body, the other to the purity 
of the mind. The two results which follow when the physical 
body is made quite pure are such as can hardly be expected. 

The physical body is essentially a dirty object as a little 
knowledge of physiology will convince anyone. Physical beauty 
is proverbially skin deep and beneath this skin there is nothing 
but a mass of flesh, bones and all kinds of secretions and waste 
products which arouse disgust in our mind when they come out 
of the body. It requires only a little effort of the imagination to 
see the body as it really is inside, but so complete is our identifica- 
tion with it that in spite of our detailed knowledge of its contents 
we not only feel no disgust for it but regard it as our most loved 
possession. And most of us go even to the length of thinking that 
we are the physical body ! 



246 



SECTION H (40,41) 



With the ordinary purification of the physical body we be- 
come more sensitive and begin to see things in their true light. 
Cleanliness is mostly a matter of sensitiveness. What is intolerably 
disgusting to a person of refined nature and habits is hardly 
noticed by another person whose nature is coarse and insensitive. 
So this feeling of disgust towards one's own body which develops 
on its purification means nothing more than that we have become 
sensitive enough to see things as they really are. Of course, the 
purity meant here is of the more superficial character which is 
brought about by ordinary external processes such as bathing and 
Yogic Kriyds such as Neti, Dhauti etc. Purity of a different and 
more fundamental character is developed by Tapas as pointed out 
in 11-43. 

The second result which follows on attaining purity of the 
physical body is naturally related to the first. A person who 
feels disgust for his own body is no,t likely to feel any attraction 
towards the bodies of others which are likely to be comparatively 
less clean. The disinclination to come in physical contact with 
others is thus natural and to be expected and this is perhaps one 
of the reasons why highly advanced Togis seek seclusion and avoid 
external contact with the world. But it should be noted that this 
does not mean any feeling of repulsion towards others, for that 
would be positively reprehensible and against the fundamental 
law of Love. A positive love towards the owner of the vehicle is 
quite compatible with a lack of desire to come in contact with 
the vehicle itself when a person has the capacity to distinguish 
between the two. 

Sattvasuddhi-saumanasyaikagryendriya- 
jayatma-darsana-yogyatvani ca. 

^v^fei purity of Sattva; purity of Antah-karana ^*nw cheer- 
ful-mindedness i^PTJT one-pointedness; fixity of attention ^SJFjPT 
control of the senses 3ikH<^M vision of the Self or Atma -zffar- 
wifa (and) fitness for ^ and; also (follow). 



SADHANA PADA 



247 



41. From mental purity (arises) purity of Sattva, 
cheerflil-mindedness, one-pointedness, control of the 
senses and fitness for the vision of the Self. 

The above Sutra gives the results of inner or mental purity. 
While the other three results which follow from mental purity are 
easily understandable, some explanation is necessary with regard 
to Sattva-Suddhi. It has already been shown that the Hindu 
conception of the manifested world with all its multifarious 
phenomena is based on the three underlying Gunas — Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas. It has also been pointed out that Sattva, the Guna 
corresponding to equilibrium alone can enable the mind to reflect 
consciousness. In fact, it is clear from the many Sutras bearing 
on the subject that the aim of the Yogi, as far as his vehicles are 
concerned, is to eliminate Rajas and Tamas and make Sattva as 
predominant as possible in order that his Citta may mirror the Purusa 
to the maximum degree. So thatj from the highest point of view 
purification is the fundamental problem involved in Self-realiza- 
tion and this purification consists essentially in the gradual 
elimination of the Rajasic and Tamasic elements from Citta working 
at different levels. Of course, this elimination is only com- 
parative. To reduce Rajas and Tamas to zero would be to reduce 
the Gunas to a state of perfect equilibrium and to take conscious- 
ness completely out of manifestation as indicated in IV-34. Sattva- 
Suddhi is, therefore, the interpretation of purification in terms of 
the Gunas as both change pari passu. 

It will also be seen that Sattva-Suddhi is the fundamental 
change involved in inner purification and the other three results 
which are brought about are the natural consequences of this 
change. For, all those conditions mentioned in 1-31 which are 
the accompaniments of Viksepa are the result of the predominance 
of Rajasic and Tamasic elements in our nature. A disturbed and 
disharmonized mind is certainly not fit for the vision of the Self. 



Samtosad anuttamah sukha-labhah. 



248 



SECTION n (42, 43) 



«ol«( id from contentment 3FpT*T: unexcelled ; imsurpassed 
gg 1 (of) happiness WHT: gain. 

42. Superlative happiness from contentment. 

The result of developing perfect contentment is superlative 
happiness. This is quite natural. The chief cause of our constant 
unhappiness is the perpetual disturbance of the mind caused by 
all kinds of desires. When a particular desire is satisfied there is. 
a temporary cessation of this unhappiness which by comparison 
we feel as happiness but the other latent desires soon assert them- 
selves and we lapse again into the normal condition of unhappi- 
ness. We sometimes feel that we are quite desireless. This feeling 
is illusory. The absence of desire in the conscious mind at 
any time does not necessarily mean that we have become desire- 
less. There may be innumerable desires, and some of them very 
strong, hidden within our sub-conscious mind. These in their 
totality produce a general feeling of discontentment even when 
there is no strong desire present in the conscious mind. Real and 
perfect contentment follows the elimination of our personal desires 
which are the source of unhappiness. 

It may be objected that the absence of unhappiness does not 
necessarily mean the presence of happiness which is a positive 
state of the mind. There is a definite reason why superlative 
happiness abides in a perfectly calm and contented mind. .A 
calm mind is able to reflect within itself the bliss which is inherent 
in our real Divine nature. The constant surging of desires pre- 
vents this bliss from manifesting itself in the mind. It is only 
when these desires are eliminated and the mind becomes perfectly 
calm that we know what true happiness is. This subtle and con- 
stant joy which is called Sukha and which comes from within is 
independent of external circumstances and is really a reflection of 
Ananda, one of the three fundamental aspects of the Self. 

Y^. + 1 ij p-j^ fa U. <%\ r^^TTcT cTW: I 

Kayendriya-siddhir asuddhi-ksayat tapasah. 



SADHANA PADA 



249 



37FT tnc body fffsq - sense-organs farfe: occult powers; per- 
fection 3T?rfe impurity ST37<T on (gradual) destruction <FTCT: from 
austerities. 

43. Perfection of the sense-organs and body after 
destruction of impurity by austerities. 



The word Siddhi is used in two senses. It means both occult 
power and perfection. Here, obviously, the word has been used 
chiefly in the latter sense. The development of Siddhis connected 
with the body takes place on Bhuta-Jaya or mastery of Bhutas as 
shown in 111-46. Since Bhuta-Jaya also leads to the perfection of 
the body — Kdya-Sampat — as defined in 111-47, the perfection of the 
body implied in 11-43 is of a different and lower kind than that 
in 111-47. The perfection meant here is obviously functional 
i.e., it enables the Yogi to use the body for the purposes of Yoga 
without any kind of resistance or hindrance from it. 

Since the. essential purpose of Tapas is to purify the body and 
bring it under the control of the will as explained in II-32 it will 
be easily seen why it should culminate in the functional per- 
fection of the body. It is the presence of impurity in the body 
and lack of control which stands in the way of its being used as 
a perfect instrument of consciousness. The function of the sense- 
organs also becomes perfect because this function is really 
dependent upon the currents of Prdna which are brought under 
the control of the Yogi by practices like those of Prdndydma. 
Prdndydma is considered to be Tapas par excellence. As the practice 
of austerities does sometimes lead to the development of some of 
the lower Siddhis in the case of people who are especially sensitive 
the word Siddhi may be considered to be used in both the senses 
given above. 

The significance of the phrase Afuddhi-ksaydt should be kept in 
mind. It shows conclusively, that the removal of impurity is the 
main purpose of performing Tapas and also that it is only when the 
body has been completely purified that it can function perfectly 
as an instrument of consciousness. 



250 SECTION II (44, 45) 

S vadhy ay ad ista-de vata-samprayogah . 

Hlt^NId from self-study (the study which leads to knowl- 
edge of the Self) ^d^dl (with) the desired deity HHU\*l : union 
or communion; coming into touch. 

44. By (or from) self-study union with the desired 
deity. 

Svddhydya attains its acme in communion with the Ista-Devatd 
because that is its ultimate purpose. As has been shown in 11-32 
although Svadhyaya begins with the study of problems relating to 
spiritual life its main purpose is to open up a channel between the 
Sadhaka and the object of his search. The nature of this com- 
munion will differ according to the temperament and capacity of 
the Sadhaka and the nature of the Isfa-Devatd. The essential 
element in such a communion is the free flow of knowledge, power 
and guidance from the higher to the lower consciousness. 

Samadhi-siddhir Isvara-pranidhanat. 

tt*ulll trance farfe: success; accomplishment; perfection fsgr 
(to) God m ("mil id from self-surrender; from resignation. 

45. Accomplishment of Samadhi from resignation 
to God. 

The fact that livara-Pranidhana can lead ultimately to Samadhi 
is a startling revelation. This fact has already been referred to in 
1-23 where Patanjali not only points out the possibility of attaining 
Samadhi through livara-Pranidhana but also in subsequent Sutras 



SADHANA PADA 



251 



shows that the path of Isvara-Pranidhdna is practically an alter- 
nate and independent path of achieving the goal which is attained 
by following the Asfdnga-Yoga with its eight stages or parts. We 
have seen previously in other cases that extraordinary results can 
be achieved by pushing the development of a virtue or quality to 
the extreme limit, but perhaps the attainment of Samadhi through 
Isvara-Pranidhdna alone is the most remarkable instance of such an 
achievement. That, by refining and intensifying progressively and 
systematically an attitude of self-surrender to God, we can by 
stages attain the supreme Enlightenment is something which 
should make us pause and marvel at the wonderful mysteries 
hidden beneath the common things of life. The rationale of this 
unique accomplishment has been explained to a certain extent 
in tI-32 but it may be worthwhile summarizing here the main 
points in the chain of reasoning. 

The bondage of the Purusa in matter is maintained through 
the obscuring power of the Citta-Vrttis which prevent his seeing 
the fundamental truth of his existence and knowing himself as he 
truly is in his Divine nature. These Citta-Vrttis are caused and 
maintained by the ' I ' consciousness which gives rise to innumer- 
able desires and keeps the mind in a state of constant agitation in 
order to satisfy those desires. If, somehow, this driving force which 
keeps the mind in a state of perpetual motion and change can be 
annihilated the mind will come automatically to a state of rest 
(Citta-Vrtli-Nirodha) just as a car comes to a stop gradually when 
the gas is shut off. It is not even necessary to apply the brakes 
though this will no doubt hasten the process of coming to a halt. 
How can this driving force which keeps the mind in a state of 
constant agitation and is ultimately responsible for the Citta-Vrttis 
be annihilated? Obviously, by destroying the desires of the per- 
sonality which provide the driving force for the mind, or to put it 
in other words, by dissolving the ' I \ This, as we have seen 
already, is exactly what is sought to be accomplished through the 
practice of Isvara-Pranidhdna. livara-Pranidhana develops Para- 
Vairdgya, breaks the bonds of the heart, eliminates the desires 
of the personality and thus naturally and inevitably reduces 
the mind to a state of Citta-Vrtti-Jfirodha which is nothing but 
Samadhi. 



252 



SECTION II (45, 46) 



It was mentioned in dealing with 11-43 that the word Siddhi 
is used in two senses, that of perfection and occult power. It is 
also used in the sense of accomplishment. In the Sutra under 
discussion it is used in two senses, that of accomplishment and 
perfection. Not only can Samadhi be attained through the practice 
of Isvara-pranidkdna but also perfected by the same- technique. 
This will also be clear from IV-29 in which the technique of 
Dharma-Megka Samadhi is given. This condition will be seen by th e 
student as the highest stage of Isuara-pranidhana. 

Sthira-sukham asanam. 

felT steady Mf£H (and) comfortable 3rRPPT posture. 

46. Posture (should be) steady and comfortable. 

The students of Toga are generally familiar with the practices 
which are denoted by the word Asana. In fact, many people who 
do not know anything about Toga confuse it with these physical 
exercises. It is, however, necessary even for the student of Yogic 
philosophy to understand clearly the place and purpose of Asanas 
in Raja-Toga, for in Hatha-Toga and certain systems of physical 
culture their purpose is very different. In Hatha-Toga the subject 
of Asanas is treated at great length and there are at least 84 Asanas 
which are described in detail, very specific and sometimes exagge- 
rated results being attributed to many of them. There is no 
doubt that .many of these Asanas, by affecting the endocrine glands 
and Pranic currents, tend to bring about very marked changes in 
the body and if practised correctly and for a sufficiently long time, 
promote health in a remarkable manner. Hatha-Toga is based on 
the principle that changes in consciousness can be brought about 
by setting in motion currents of certain kinds of subtler forces 
(Prana, Kwidalini) in the physical body. The first step in con- 
tacting the deeper levels of consciousness is, therefore, to make 
the physical body perfectly healthy and fit for the influx and 



SADHANA PADA 



253 



manipulation of these forces. That is why such a strong emphasis 
is laid on the preparation of the physical body and the Sddhaka is 
required to go through different kinds of physical exercises which 
are dealt with in treatises on Hafka-Toga. 

In Raja-Toga, however, the method adopted for bringing 
about changes in consciousness is .based essentially on the control 
of the mind by the Will and the gradual suppression of the Citta- 
Vrttis. The technique of Raj a- Yoga is, therefore, directed towards 
the elimination of all sources of disturbance to the mind, whether 
these sources are external or internal. Now, one of the important 
sources of disturbance to the mind is the physical body. Even 
modern psychology recognizes the close connection between the 
mind and the body and how they act and react on each other all 
the time. So the Yogi must eliminate completely the disturbances 
which arise from the physical body before he tries to tackle the 
problem of the mind itself. This is achieved through the practice 
of Asana. The physical body is fixed in one particular posture 
and it is found that when it can be kept like this for a long time 
it ceases to be a source of disturbance to the mind. 

Patanjali gives only three Sutras regarding the technique of 
Asanas but in these he has condensed all the essential knowledge 
concerning the subject. The first of these given above points 
out the two essential requirements in the practice of Asana. It 
should be steady and comfortable. The Yogi has to choose any 
one of the well-known Asanas suitable for the practice of medita- 
tion such as Padmdsana or Siddkasana and then practise remaining 
in that posture until he can maintain it for long periods of time 
without the slightest inclination to make any movement. Sitting 
in any Asana becomes uncomfortable after a few minutes and the 
beginner will find that he cannot maintain it for any considerable 
time without feeling minor discomforts in various parts of the 
body. If, however, the Asana is correctly chosen and practised in 
the right way, steady and persistent practice will gradually eliminate 
all these minor discomforts which cause constant distractions to the 
mind. The Yogi is then able to maintain his body in the correct 
posture indefinitely and to forget it altogether. If, in spite of 
prolonged practice and good health, one always feels discomfort in 
maintaining the posture for long periods there is something wrong 



254 



SECTION U (46, 47) 



either with one's choice of the Asana or method of practising it 
and it is advisable to seek expert advice. 

It is also necessary to understand thoroughly the implication 
of the word 'steady'. Steadiness does not mean merely the 
capacity to remain more or less in the same position with freedom 
to make minor movements and adjustments from time to time. 
It means a certain degree of immovability which practically 
amounts to fixing the body in one position and eliminating all 
movements of any kind. In trying to maintain this immovable 
position the beginner is apt to introduce a certain amount of 
rigidity which makes the body tense. This is definitely wrong 
and will react adversely on the health of the body. What 
should be aimed at is the ideal combination of immovability with 
relaxation. It is only then that it is possible to forget the body 
altogether. 

A particular Asana is considered to be mastered when the 
Sddhaka can maintain it steadily and easily for four hours and 
twenty minutes. This period of time as given in some books on 
Hafha-Toga has really no important significance and gives merely 
an approximate idea of the length of time for which practice may 
be undertaken for gaining mastery. Once the habit has been 
acquired the posture can be maintained for. any length of time 
while the Togi's attention is focussed on his mind. 

*\ 

Prayatna-saithilyananta-samapattibhyam. 

MMH (of) effort SrfsTFJT (by) relaxation 3R^r (on) the 
'Endless' fl^imfd^lH (and) by meditation. 

47. By relaxation of effort and meditation on the 
* Endless ' (posture is mastered) . 

For acquiring mastery of an Asana Patanjali gives two helpful 
suggestions. One is the gradual slackening of effort. The keeping 
of the physical body in an immovable position for long periods of 



SADHANA PADA 



255 



time requires great effort of the will and the mind has to be 
directed constantly to the body in order to maintain it in the 
fixed position. But it is quite obvious that this state of the mind 
is the opposite of what is aimed at. The mind has to be freed 
from the consciousness of the body, not tied down to it in the 
effort to keep it in a particular posture. So the Sddhaka is advised 
to slacken the effort gradually and transfer the control of the body 
from the conscious to the sub-conscious mind. The conscious 
mind can thus be withdrawn from the body without affecting the 
fixed condition of the body in any manner. This is a gradual 
process but a definite effort has to be made to break this connec- 
tion between the mind and the body, so that the latter can remain 
in the prescribed position without requiring any attention from 
the former. 

The other means recommended for acquiring this steadiness 
is meditation on Ananta, the great Serpent which, according to 
Hindu mythology, upholds the earth. To the modern educated 
man this direction will appear quite meaningless but if he under- 
stands the underlying significance he will see that it is quite 
reasonable. What is this Serpent which is called Ananta? It is the 
symbolic, representation of the force which maintains the equili- 
brium of the earth and keeps it in its orbit round the Sun. This 
force, we can see at once, must be similar to the one which works 
in a gyroscope, a well-known instrument which is utilized in many 
ways for maintaining an object in a position of equilibrium. When- 
ever we have to deal with a body which is liable to move from 
side to side or in some other manner and has to be brought back 
and kept in a position of equilibrium automatically the principle 
of the gyroscope is utilized invariably in devising the necessary 
machinery. Now, the problem of the person who is sitting in a 
particular Asana for the purpose of meditation is very similar. The 
body tends to deviate from a fixed position and it has to acquire 
the tendency to come back to its position of stability automatically. 
So meditation on Anarta the Serpent which symbolizes this 
particular kind of force is prescribed. The reason why this force 
is symbolized by a serpent will be apparent to anyone who has 
seen a gyroscope which reminds one of a coiled snake with its 
head raised as shown below : 



256 



SECTION II (47, 48) 





Fig. 7 

In Hindu symbolism a thing is generally symbolized by an object 
or animal which it resembles most closely in outer appearance. 

How does meditation on this force help the Sadhaka to acquire 
the stability of the physical posture which he wants to maintain? 
It is not necessary here to do more than refer to the well-known law 
of Nature according to which meditation or deep pondering over 
any idea or principle tends to bring down the corresponding force 
gradually in our life. In fact, the whole science of acquiring 
Siddhis or occult powers as expounded in Section III of the Toga- 
Sutras is based on this axiomatic truth of Togic philosophy. It 
should be noted that the word used is Samdpattibhyam which means 
' fusing the mind with '. This is really what happens when we 
ponder deeply or meditate on an idea and open up a channel for 
the influx of its corresponding power. 

Tato dvandvanabhighatah. 

3cT: from that (mastery of posture) iF£ (from) pairs of 
opposites dftfomd: no assaults. 

48. From that no assaults from the pairs of 
opposites. 

The third Sutra hints at the most important result of attaining 
perfection in the practice of Asana — -resistance to the pairs of 



SADHANA PADA 



257 



opposites. These pairs of opposites or Dvandpas as they are called 
iri Samskrta are the well-known opposite conditions in our outer or 
inner environment between which our life continually oscillates. 
These Dvandvas are of many kinds, some related to our physical 
nature, others to our mind. Thus heat and cold are a pair of 
opposites which affect primarily the physical body. Joy and 
sorrow are a pair which affect the mind. Now, all these condi- 
tions, related to the mind or body which are constantly changing 
keep the consciousness drawn to the external environment and 
hinder the mind in going within. They produce. Viksepa or dis-^ 
traction and the Sadhaka has to acquire the capacity of rising 
above them if his mind is to be freed to pursue the more difficult 
task of suppressing its own internal disturbances and modifications. 
One important result of gaining perfection in the practice, of Asana 
is freedom from these disturbing reactions to Changes in the 
external wOrld. It is obvious that the Dvandvas referred to in this 
Sutra are those which affect the physical body, such as heat and cold, 
humidity and dryness and not others which are related to the mind. 
Patanjali has given in this Sutra only one result of practising 
Asana, a result with which the Sadhaka is directly concerned in the 
practice of Toga. But there are also other important benefits 
which accrue from this practice. Some of these subsidiary results 
of practising Asana are: 

(1) Making the body perfectly healthy and resistant to 
fatigue and strain. 

(2) Acquiring - fitness for the practice of Pranayama as a 
result of proper regulation of Pranic currents in the 
body. In fact, those who become proficient in the 
practice of Asana find that the movements of the breath 
begin naturally to conform to the requirements of 
Pranayama and it becomes possible to take to the 
practice of Pranayama with the greatest ease. 

(3) Development of will-power. The physical body is 
directly and in some mysterious manner related to the 
Atmd, the source of spiritual power. Gaining control 
over the physical body which mastery of Asana implies 
brings about an extraordinary influx of that spiritual 
force which expresses itself in outer life as will-power. 

17 



258 section n (49) 

VS.- dfc+H Sffa WKI'HiWKI^lfilPl'W: *FTT- 

Tasmin sati svasa-prasvasayor gati- 
vicchedah pranayamah. 

dft*H on this (perfection of Asana) ?ErfiT having been (accom- 
plished) i3TO5p^T?nft: of in-breathing and out-breathing; of 
inspiration and expiration *rf?T (of) movement fa-«&<*: cessation 
or break WTFTTR": (is) regulation of breath (fourth constituent part 
of Toga). 

49. This having been (accomplished) Pranayama 
which is cessation of inspiration and expiration (follows). 

The reason why Pranayama plays such an important part in 
the technique of Toga lies in the close relation existing between 
Prana and mind. Prana which exists on all the planes of mani- 
festation is the connecting link between matter and energy on the 
one hand and consciousness and mind on the other. Conscious- 
ness expressing itself through the mind cannot come into touch 
with matter and function through it without the intermediate 
presence of Prana. Matter in association with energy cannot affect 
consciousness except through the agency of Praria. That is why 
Prana is found on all the planes. It is necessary for the vitaliza- 
tion and functioning of all vehicles of consciousness, physical or 
superphysical. This capacity to act as intermediary depends upon 
its peculiar constitution. It combines in itself in some mysterious 
manner the essential qualities of both matter and consciousness 
and is thus able to serve as an instrument for their actions and 
reactions on each other. 

This intimate relation existing between Prana and mind is 
utilized in different schools of Toga in different ways. In Hatha- 
Jbga manipulation of Pranic currents is utilized for bringing about 
control of Gitta-Vrttis and changes in consciousness. In Raja-Yoga, 
Gitta-Vrttis are controlled by consciousness through the will and 
Prana thus comes under the control of the mind. Patanjali has 



SADHANA PADA 



259 



included both the techniques in his system in order to make it as 
comprehensive and effective as possible. Thus Pranayama is utilized 
for preparing the mind for Dkarana, Dkyana and Samadhi on the 
one hand and Samyama on various objects or principles used for 
acquiring Siddhis on the other. 

Although students of Togic philosophy are generally familiar 
with the theory of Pranayama and a fairly extensive literature exists 
on the subject it would be worthwhile discussing here very briefly 
some fundamental facts in this connection. This will clear the 
ground for understanding the inner significance of the five Sutras 
in which Patanjali has dealt with the subject. 

Many people who have not studied the subject or studied it 
very superficially have the notion that Pranayama is merely a 
regulation of breathing. How it is possible by merely regulating 
breathing which is a normal physiological process in the body, to 
bring about the extraordinary results attributed to Pranayama does 
not occur to them. The nature of Pranayama. is indicated by the 
two words which constitute the compound word, namely Prana 
and Ayama (restraint). It is the regulation of Prana. But what is 
Prana? It is not the breath but the vital force which keeps up the 
activities of the physical body. This vital force is not something 
vague and mysterious which medical science believes exists within 
the body maintaining its equilibrium and guarding it against 
disease and death. It is a real, highly specialized kind of com- 
posite energy with a material basis which is entirely different from 
the other kinds of energies working in the body. The vehicle of 
this Prana is not the dense physical body with which physiologists 
are familiar but the Pranamaya KoSa, a somewhat subtler vehicle 
interpenetrating the dense physical body and working in conjunc- 
tion with it. In this subtler vehicle which is practically a counter- 
part of the dense physical body run currents of Prana, flowing alonf 
well-marked channels into every organ and part of the body and 
vitalizing them in different ways. For, Prana though it is a general 
vitalizing force, has also specific functions to perform in different 
organs and parts of the body and is then called by different 
names which are well known. It is the control of this Prana 
which is aimed at in Pranayama and not breathing which is only 
one of the many manifestations of its action in the physical body. 



260 



SECTION II (49) 



But though Prana is different from breath as the electric 
current is different from the movement of the blades in an electric 
fan, still, there is a close connection between the two, a connection 
which enables us to manipulate the currents of Prana by mani- 
pulating breathing. This close connection between breathing and 
Prana is, no doubt, responsible for the confusion between the two 
but it is necessary for the student to keep this distinction clearly 
in his mind. 

The methods adopted in controlling and manipulating Prana 
by regulation of the breath are a closely guarded secret which 
can be obtained only from a competent teacher. Those who take 
up these practices after merely reading books are sure to ruin 
their health and even risk insanity or death. So, no one should 
dabble in Pranayama for the sake of fun or for gaining supernormal 
powers of various kinds or even for hastening his spiritual pro- 
gress. These forces are very real though not known as yet to 
modern . Science, and many people have ruined their lives by 
rashly starting practices given in spurious Togic literature or under 
the advice of immature and over-confident ' Togis '. The practice 
of Pranayama can be taken up safely and profitably only as a part 
of the full Togic discipline and when adequately prepared for by 
the practice of the other accessories of Toga such as Tama-Niyama, 
Asana etc. and under the supervision of a competent Guru. 

But while abstaining strictly from the ill-advised practice of 
Pranayama proper there is no harm in trying to understand its 
rationale and the limit to which one can go wijh safety in the 
manipulation of breathing for the sake of promoting physical and 
mental health. The essential knowledge with regard to this aspect 
of the subject may be summarized as follows : 

(1) Deep breathing has nothing to do with Pranayama and 
may be practised as an exercise for promoting health to 
any reasonable extent. Its beneficial effects depend 
chiefly upon the increased intake of oxygen and a some- 
what greater influx of Prana into the body. As it does 
not affect the Pranic currents in the body its practice is 
not attended by any risks. 

(2) Breathing alternately through the two nostrils begins at 
once to affect the Pranic currents to a certain extent and 



SADHANA PAD A 



261 



tends to remove the congestion from the channels in 
which Prdna flows normally. It has been pointed out 
already that there is a close relation between breathing 
and the flow of Pranic currents in the Pranamaya Kosa. 
When we breathe normally the Pranic currents follow 
their natural course. When we breathe alternately 
through the two nostrils their normal flow is disturbed in 
some way. The effect may be likened to the flow of 
water in a pipe. When the water is flowing in one 
direction placidly, silt and other things may be deposited 
at the bottom and are not disturbed to any marked 
extent by the water. But try to force the water in 
opposite directions, alternately and you at once disturb 
the deposit and if the process is continued long enough 
the pipe gets cleaned ultimately. This is how breathing 
alternately through the two nostrils may be supposed to 
clean the Pranic channels or to ' purify the Nadis ' as we 
say. Now, this purification of the Kadis is a preparatory 
exercise and all those who intend, to practise Pranayama 
have to go through a long course extending over several 
months or years. It is similar to the preliminary exercise 
suggested by Patanjali in 1-34 and produces the same 
condition in the nervous system, namely absence of 
irritation and tranquillity. This exercise is not attended 
with any risk and can be adopted with caution by those 
who live a well-regulated and clean life and are not 
given to excesses of, any kind. But since the Pranic 
currents are affected in the process, caution and modera- 
tion are necessary and it is advisable to work under the 
supervision of an expert. 
(3) Real Pranayama begins when the breath is stopped for 
some time between inhalation and exhalation. While 
breathing alternately through the two nostrils the breath 
may be stopped for some time, the period being increased 
gradually and cautiously. The retention of breath, 
called technically Kumbhaka, affects the flow of Pranic 
currents in a very marked and fundamental manner and 
enables the Yogi to gain increasing control over these 



262 



SECTION n (49) 



currents so that they can be directed in any manner 

desired. 

(4) Pranayama has to be practised with Puraka and Recaka 

(inspiration and expiration) for a long time* the period 

of Kumbhaka being slowly increased over long periods of 

time. Such a Kumbhaka which is accompanied by Puraka 

and Recaka is called Sahita Kumbhaka. But after prolonged 

practice it is possible to dispense with Puraka and Recaka 

and practise Kumbhaka alone. Such Pranayama, called 

Kevala Kumbhaka, gives complete control over Prdna and 

enables the Togi to perform not only all kinds of physical 

feats but also to arouse and direct Kundalini towards 

different centres in the body. This science is a strictly 

guarded secret and can be learnt only by a properly 

qualified Celd from a properly qualified Guru. 

The important point to keep in mind is this. Not only is 

Kumbhaka the essential element of real Pranayama but it is also the 

source of danger in the practice of Pranayama. The moment one 

starts retaining the breath, especially inside, in any abnormal 

manner the danger begins and one can never know what it will 

lead to, unless there is a practical and competent teacher at hand 

to guide and correct the flow of these forces if necessary. If all 

the requisite conditions are present and Kumbhaka is practised 

under the guidance of a competent teacher it unlocks the doors of 

unexpected experiences and powers. If it is taken up without the 

necessary preparation and guidance it is sure to lead to disaster 

and may be death, as many rash and foolish people have found 

to their cost. 

The significance of the words Tasmin Sati in the beginning of 
the Sutra should be kept in mind. As this Sutra comes after the 
three Sutras dealing with Asanas these words obviously mean that 
the practice of Pranayama involving Kumbhaka cannot be under- 
taken until and unless one of the Asanas has been mastered. The 
practice of Asana definitely but slowly prepares the body for 
Pranayama. It is the common experience of practical students of 
Toga that the body begins naturally to assume more and more the 
condition necessary for the practice of Prdndydma as perfection in 
the practice of Asana is gained. The breath begins to move slowly 



SADHANA PADA 



263 



and rhythmically and even Kumbhaka occurs for short periods in 
a natural way. 

In fact, it is not only necessary to master Asana but also to 
acquire some proficiency in the practice of Tama-Niyama before 
beginning the practice of Pranayama. The advanced practice of 
Pranayama arouses the Kundalini sooner or later* This can be done 
safely only after the desire for sex gratification has been completely 
mastered and eliminated. Unless, therefore, the Sadhaka has 
practised Brahmacarya and other elements of Tama-Niyama for a 
long time and has acquired conscious and real mastery oyer his 
desires and propensities it would be disastrous for him to engage 
in the practice of Pranayama. It must be clearly understood that 
these things are not meant for people who are leading the ordinary 
life of the world with all its desires and indulgences and who 
naively want the peace and bliss of the inner life as an addition to 
their multitudinous enjoyments in the outer world. The door on 
the enjoyments and comforts of the lower life has to be shut 
completely and once for all before one can hope to make any real 
progress on the path of Toga. 

The different elements of Aspdnga Toga are not merely eight 
essential but quite independent parts of Toga which can be 
practised irrespective of one another. They should be taken in 
the light of progressive stages, each stage preparing for the succeed- 
ing ones and requiring an adequate degree of perfection in the 
preceding ones. The whole treatment oiAsfdnga Toga by Patanjali 
and the experience of Sddhakas lends support to this view. 

It is also necessary to note the difference in the words used 
in 1-34 and 11-49 in relation to breathing. In the former Sutra the 
words used are ' expiration and retention ' while in the latter the 
words are ' cessation of inspiration and expiration '. It is not due to 
any looseness of expression that different words are used to describe 
the regulation of breathing at different places. Not a word in the 
Toga-Sutras is without its significance and necessity although we 
may not be able to see these clearly. The obvious intention of 
the author is to indicate that the practice of Pranayama which 
comes after Tama-Niyama and Asana and which prepares the mind 
for the further stages of Dhdrana, Dhydna and Samddhi is essentially 
the practice of Kumbhaka even though this practice must be 



264 



SECTION H (49, 50) 



preceded by a long course of Prdndydma in which PSraka and 
Rtcaka also play a part. 

Bahyabhyantara-stambha-vrttir desakala- 
samkhyabhih paridrsto dlrghasuksmah. 

WT^r outer; external 3)|Wj«tf < internal ttJ-tt^fti: suppressed; 
paralysed; (stopped suddenly) modification ^JT (by) place 37T?T 
time, "Hte4lfrr: (and) number 7f?^£: measured; regulated ?H 
prolonged ^W: (and) subtle; attenuated. 

50. (It is in) external, internal or suppressed 
modification; is regulated by place, time and number, 
(and becomes progressively) prolonged and subtle. 

In the Sutra given above the various factors involved in the 
practice oT Prdndydma have been dealt with in a very terse manner. 
The first factor is the position in which the breath is held. There 
can be three modes of performing Kumbhaka and the three kinds 
of Prdndydma referred to in this Sutra depend upon these. Either 
the breath is held outside after expiration, or held inside after 
inspiration or just stopped wherever it is at the moment. It is 
the position or manner in which the breath is held or stopped 
which determines the kind of Pranayama. The second factor is the 
place where Pranayama is performed. This will obviously have to 
be taken into account in determining the period for which Prana- 
yama is performed, the food which is taken and other things. A 
Sadhaka who is practising Pranayama in the tropics will have to 
adopt a different regimen from the one which is suited for another 
practising high up in the Himalayas. The third factor is the time. 
Time here means not only the relative duration of Puraka, Recaka 
and Kumbhaka but also the time of the year in which Prdndyama is 
being practised. Diet etc. has to be changed according to the season. 
Number, obviously, refers to the number of rounds at each sitting 



SADHANA PADA 



265 



and the number of sittings in one day. The Sadhaka generally 
starts with a small. number of rounds at each sitting and gradually 
and cautiously increases the number according to the instructions 
of his teacher. 

After pointing out the factors which are involved in regulating 
the practice of Prdndyama the author gives two words which indi- 
cate the nature of the objective towards which the efforts of the 
Sadhaka should be directed. In the first place, the period of 
Kumbhaka has to be very gradually and cautiously prolonged. The 
fourth kind of Pranayama referred to in the next Sutra cannot be 
practised until the Sadhaka has acquired the capacity to practise 
Kumbhaka for fairly long periods of time. Not only has he to 
prolong the period of Kumbhaka but he has also to work in the 
direction of gradually transferring the process from the outer to 
the inner invisible plane. This means that the Prdndydma from 
being merely a control and manipulation of the visible process of 
breathing becomes a process of controlling and manipulating the 
Prdnic currents flowing in the Prdnamaya Kosa. This transference 
of activity from the outer to the inner plane can come only after 
Kumbhaka can be practised easily without any strain for fairly long 
periods, but it must come if Prdndydma is to be used for its' real 
purpose in Togic discipline. 

Bahyabhyantara-visay aksepl caturthah . 

gn*T external srwr^TC (and) interna] f^PT range; sphere; 
domain ajPHMt going beyond ^*T: (is) the fourth (variety of 
Prdndydma.) 

51. That Pranayama which goes beyond the sphere 
of internal and external is the fourth (variety). 

The fourth and the highest kind of Prdndydma referred to in 
this Sutra transcends the movements of the breath altogether. 
The externa] breath is kept suspended in any position, external or 



266 



SECTION II (51, 52) 



f't 



SADHANA PADA 



267 



internal, and there is nothing to show that any kind of activity is 
going on. And yet the Pranic currents in the Prdnamaya Koia 
which are now under the complete control of the Sddhaka are 
being manipulated and directed with a view to bring about the 
desired changes in the vehicle. 

For conducting operations of such delicacy and importance 
it is necessary that the Sddhaka should be able to see clearly the 
mechanism of the Prdnamaya Kosa and direct the currents of Prdna 
deliberately and unerringly. Such direct vision which means 
clairvoyance of the lowest kind, develops naturally and automatf- 
cally during the course of Prdnaydma practice. 

The fourth kind of Prdnaydma referred to in the Sutra under dis- 
cussion is the real Prdnaydma for which all the previous practices 
are merely a preparation. What takes place during the course of 
these practices, how the Pranic currents are used to arouse Kunda- 
lini how the Kundalim activates the Cakras in the Susumnd is not 
mentioned by Patanjali because all these things of a practical 
nature which are fraught with dangerous possibilities are taught 
by the Guru personally to the Geld. Patanjali has throughout 
dealt with general principles and left out instructions with regard 
to practical details. 

Tatah ksiyate prakaiavaranam. 

^RT: then; from that Jjft^d dissolves; disappears JJ+IVI (of) 
light 3iH<u|*| covering. 

52. From that is dissolved the covering of light. 

In this Sutra and the next are given two results of Prdnaydma 
practice which are of great importance to the Yogi. The first is 
the disappearance of the covering of light. Many commentators 
have gone completely off the track in the interpretation of the 
Sutra under discussion mistaking this light to be the light of the 
soul. They thu3 attribute to Prdnaydma practice accomplishment 



1 1- 



of results which appear after considerable success has been gained 
in the subsequent practices of Dharand, Dhyana and Samddhi. This 
misinterpretation is all the more surprising in view of the Sutra 
which follows. If Prdnaydma prepares the mind for the practice 
of Dhdrand which is the first step in mental control how can it 
bring about the removal of the covering of light of the soul which 
is the culmination of mental control? 

The covering of light referred to in this Sutra is obviously not 
used in reference to the light of the soul but to the light or lumin- 
osity associated with the subtler vehicles associated with and 
interpenetrating the physical vehicle. The distribution of Prdna 
in the Prdnamaya Koia and the development of the psychic centres 
in the ordinary individual is such that he is quite insensitive to 
these subtler planes. When, through the practice of Prdnaydma, the 
necessary changes in the distribution of Prdna have been made and 
the psychic centres have been activated the mechanism of the 
subtler bodies comes into close and more intimate touch with the 
physical brain and it is possible to become aware of the subtler 
vehicles and the luminosity which is associated with them. 

An additional advantage to the Sddhaka of this ' contact ' with 
the subtler vehicles is that the mental images which he has to 
work with in Dhdrand and Dhyana become very precise and almost 
tangible. The cloudy and blurred mental images which an 
ordinary person is able to form in his brain are replaced by clear- 
cut and sharp images in the subtler vehicles. These are mani- 
pulated and controlled with far greater ease. 

Dharanasu ca yogyata manasah. 

UKillg for (stages of) concentration *t and 4)<4dl fitness 
*Hfl: of the mind. 

53. And the fitness of the mind for concentration. 

The second result of Prdnaydma practice is that it prepares the 
mind for the practice of Dhdrand, Dhyana and Samddhi — Antaranga 



268 



SECTION II (53, 54) 



SADHANA PADA 



269 



Toga. The capacity to form vivid and sharp mental images and 
to be able to see them clearly is necessary for practising Dhdrand 
effectively. As long as our mental images are blurred and confused 
it is not easy to concentrate on them or manipulate them, .as all 
people who try to meditate know from practical experience. The 
mind does not seem to get a good hold on them and they tend to 
slip away- easily. Pranaydma by removing this difficulty facilitates 
concentration to a great extent. To say that Pranaydma is abso- 
lutely necessary for Dhdrand will perhaps not be justifiable in view 
of the success attained by followers of other schools of Toga also* 
But that it helps enormously in the practice of Dhdrana there can be 
no doubt.. That is why Patanjali has made it an integral part of 
his Togic technique. 

Sva-visayasamprayoge citta-svarupanukara 
ivendriyanam pratyaharah. 

^ (with) their own; their respective faqq - objects Sjfl'M^Vt ' 
not coming into contact f%rj (of) the individual mind's fr^H 
own form; nature a^prc: the imitating, or functioning according 
to ^r as if; like ^feTFlt by the senses Mr4l£K: abstraction (fifth 
constituent of Toga). 

54. Pratyahara or abstraction is, as it were, the 
imitation by the senses of the mind by withdrawing 
themselves from their objects. 

Pratyahara is the next Anga or component part of Toga after 
Pranaydma. There seems to exist a good deal of uncertainty in the 
mind of the average student with regard to the nature of this Togic 
practice. Patanjali has disposed of the subject in two Siitras and 
the commentaries are not very illuminative. In order to under- 
stand what Pratyahara really means let us recall how mental per- 
ception of objects in the outer world takes place. We perceive an 
object when different kinds of vibrations which emaaate from it 



■ A 



strike our sense-organs and the mind is then joined to the sense- 
organs thus activated. As a matter of fact, from the physiological 
and psychological points of view there are many stages intervening 
between the reception of the vibration by the sense-organs and the 
perception by the mind but let us, for the sake of simplicity, 
confine ourselves to the simple representation of the mechanism 
of sense -perception as generally understood. This may be repre- 
sented diagrammatically as follows: 



Bhutas 
(elements) 



Prithvi (earth) >• 

Jala (water) >- 

Tejas (light) =>- 

Vayu (air) >■ 

Akds'a (ether) >- 



Indiiyas 
(sense- 
organs) 



tongue- 
eye 

skin' 

ear 



Tanmatras 
(sensations) 



->- smell 

-> taste 

->■ sigbt 

-> touch 

->- hearing 



Citta 
(mind) 



Buddhi 
(per- 
ception) 



Atma 
(Spirit) 




Now, it is a matter of common experience that the corres- 
ponding vibrations may be striking against any particular sense- 
organ but if the mind is not joined, as it were, to that sense-organ 
the vibrations remain unperceived. The clock in our room keeps 
ticking constantly but we rarely hear the ticking. Although the 
vibrations of sound are striking the ear constantly the conscious 
mind is not joined to the organ of hearing as far as those vibrations 
are concerned. When we pass down a road vibrations from 
hundreds of objects strike our eye but we notice only a few, the 
rest not entering our consciousness at all because of this lack of 
contact between the mind and those vibrations. Innumerable 
vibrations from all kinds of objects are thus constanly impinging 
upon our sense-organs but most of these remain unnoticed. Still, 
a few do manage to catch our attention and these in their totality 
constitute the content of our awareness of the external world. 

A very interesting fact about this process of sense-perception 
is that although the mind is automatically ignoring the vast 
majority of vibrations bombarding its sense-organs it cannot shut 
out all of them voluntarily if it wants to. A few vibrations always 
manage to catch the attention and the mind is generally helpless 



270 



SECTION II (54) 



against the inroads of these unwanted intruders. In fact, the more 
it tries to shut them out the more numerous and insistent they 
become as anyone can find out for himself by making a few efforts 
in this direction. 

But, for the practice of Raja Toga the outer world has to be 
shut out completely, whenever necessary, in order that the Yogi 
may have his mind alone to grapple with. Let us go into this 
question a little more in detail. If we examine the contents of 
our mind at any time when we are not making any particular 
mental effort we shall find that the mental images which are pre- 
sent and changing constantly may be divided into the following 
three categories: (1) Ever-changing impressions produced by the 
outer world through the vibrations impinging upon the sense- 
organs. (2) Memories of past experiences floating in the mind. 
(3) Mental images connected with anticipations of the future. (2) 
and (3) are wholly mental, not depending upon any objective 
reality outside the mind while (1) are the direct result of contact 
with the outer world. The object of Pratyahara is to eliminate 
(1) completely from the mind, thus leaving only (2) and (3) 
which are then mastered through Dharana and Dkyana. Pratyahara 
interposes, as it' were, a shutter between the sense-organs 
and the mind and isolates the latter completely from the external 
world. 

In the light of what has been said above it should be easy to 
understand the meaning of the rather enigmatic Sutra we are dis- 
cussing. It will help us to appreciate the manner in which the 
idea has been expressed if we remember that according to Yogic 
psychology the senses are really a part of the lower mind. They 
are, as it were, the outposts of the mind in the external world and 
should follow the lead of the mind. When the mind wants to 
put itself in touch with the external world they should begin to 
function. When it decides to withdraw they should be able to 
withdraw with it, thus breaking all connection with the world 
outside. This relation between the mind and the senses has been 
likened very aptly to the relation existing between the bees in a 
hive and the queen bee. The bees follow the queen in a body as 
it flies from one place to another, and do not function independ- 
ently of the queen. 



SADHANA PADA 



271 



Is this complete severance of connection with the world out- 
side in the manner indicated possible? It is not only possible but 
absolutely necessary if the higher stages of the Yogic path are to 
be trodden. But in order that success may be attained the Yogic 
life has to be adopted as a whole. AH the different steps or com- 
ponent parts of Yogic discipline are linked with one another and 
success in tackling any particular problem depends to a great 
extent upon how far the other related problems, especially those 
going before, have been mastered. If Yama and Niyama have not 
been practised sufficiently and all emotional disturbances elimi- 
nated, if Asana and Prandyama have not been mastered and the 
physical body brought under complete control, then surely, the 
practice of Pratyahara is bound to end in failure. But if the whole 
of the Sadhaka's life conforms to the Yogic ideal and all his energies 
are bent on achieving -his ultimate goal then success must come 
sooner or later. 

It should also be mentioned here that though Pratyahara 
' appears to be a control of the senses by the mind, the essential 
technique is really the withdrawal of the mind into itself. It is a 
kind of abstraction so complete that the sense-organs cease to 
function. Any school boy who is intensely interested in a novel 
cuts himself off from the outer world. Any inventor like Edison 
who is absorbed in a problem can forget the external world com- 
pletely. But in all such cases, although a high degree of abstraction 
is attained the abstraction is involuntary and there is something in 
the external world on which the mind is concentrated. In 
Pratyahara the abstraction is voluntary and the mind has no object 
of attraction in the external world. Its field of activity is entirely 
within itself and the external world is kept out by the sheer force 
of will, as in Raja Yoga, or by the supreme attractive power of an 
object of love within, as in Bhakti Yoga. 

Tatah parama vasyatendriyanam. 

?RT: then; from that <TT*TT the highest; the greatest ^qcTT 
mastery ^f?S4l"J||^ over the senses. 



272 



SECTION II (55) 



55. Then follows the greatest mastery over the 
senses. 

The successful practice of Pratyahara as we have seen in the 
previous Sutra gives complete control over the Tndriyas in the sense 
that we no longer remain their slaves but become their master, 
switching them off and on as we switch off and on the electric light 
in bur room. What such a power will mean to an ordinary man 
can be easily imagined, but for a Raja Yogi it is a sine qua non. 

It is interesting to note how the first five Angas of Toga elim- 
inate one after another different sources of disturbance to the 
mind and prepare it for the final struggle with its own Vrttis. First 
to be eliminated by Tama-Niyama are the emotional disturbances 
due to moral defects in one's nature. Next to be eliminated by 
the practice of Asana are the disturbances which arise in the 
physical body. Then come the disturbances caused by the irregular 
or insufficient flow of vital forces in the Pranic sheath. All these 
are removed completely by the practice of Pranayama. And lastly, 
through Pratyahara is removed the major source of disturbances 
coming through the sense-organs. Thus is accomplished Bahirafiga 
or external Toga and the Sadhaka becomes capable of treading the 
further stages of Antaranga or internal Toga. 



SECTION III 



VIBHUTI PADA 



18 



VIBHUTI PADA 



Desa-bandhas cittasya dharana. 

%ST place; spot ^£p. binding; confining; fixing f^rTFT of 
the mind fclK u ll concentration. 

1. Concentration is the confining of the mind 
within a limited mental area (object of concentration) . 

As has been pointed out already, the first five Ahgas of Toga 
eliminate, step by step, the external causes of mental distraction. 
Tama and Niyama eliminate the disturbances. which are caused by 
uncontrolled emotions and desires. Asana and Prdndydma eliminate 
the disturbances arising from the physical body. Pratydhdra, by 
detaching the sense-organs from the mind, cuts off the external 
world and the impressions which it produces on the mind. The 
mind is thus completely isolated from the external world and the 
Sadhaka is thus in a position to grapple with it without any inter- 
ference from outside. It is only under these conditions that the 
successful practice of Dharand, Dhydna and Samddhi is possible. 

Although the different Ahgas of Yoga appear to be independent 
of each other and it may be possible to a certain extent to practise 
Asana, Dhyana etc. independently of other Ahgas, still, we have to 
keep in mind that they have also a sequential relationship and the 
effective practice of one Ahga required at least a partial mastery of 
those which precede it. The main reason why the vast majority 
of aspirants for the Togic life keep struggling with the mind year 
after year and then generally give up the effort as a hopeless task 
lies in the lack of systematic preparation without which even the 



276 



SECTION III (1) 



elementary practice of Dharana is very difficult, to say nothing of 
the further stages of Dhyana and Samadhi. Theoretically, it is 
possible for the student to start right away with the mind and he 
may succeed in practising meditation to a certain extent but he 
cannot go very far in this manner and his progress is bound to 
come to a stop sooner or later. It is only when he has prepared 
himself in the manner indicated above that he can go on steadily 
right up to the end. In the rare cases where people have practised 
meditation successfully without any other kind of preparation it 
will be found that they had already developed the necessary 
qualifications, even though they did not go through all the prac- 
tices in this life. It is the possession of the qualifications and not 
going through the prescribed practices which determines the 
fitness of the Sadhaka for taking up the practice of Dharana, Dhyana 
and Samadhi. These qualifications for the Togic life are the 
cumulative result of several lives of effort in this direction and one 
need not go through every practice in a particular life. Some 
people are born, for example, with a high degree of Vairagya and 
show even in their childhood a remarkable capacity for controlling 
their vehicles. They have not to go through the long and tedious 
discipline which is essential for the ordinary man. Anyway, 
Patanjali has pointed out unambiguously the necessity of going 
through the first five Angas of Toga before taking up the practice 
of Dharana, as for example in 11-53. 

Before dealing with the question of Dharana it is necessary to 
point out that though the word concentration has to be used for 
translating Dharana there is a great deal of difference between 
what an ordinary man means by concentration of mind and 
what this phrase means in Togic psychology. Without going into 
details it may be stated that the main difference, and a very 
fundamental difference, is that according to modern psychology 
the mind cannot be made to remain fixed on any object for any 
considerable time. It must remain moving even when concen- 
tration of the highest degree has been attained. Concentration 
according to this view is the controlled movement of the mind 
within a limited sphere and by keeping the mind confined in this 
manner all the remarkable results of concentrated mental effort 
can be obtained. But according to Eastern psychology upon 



VIBHUTI PADA 



277 



which the Science of Toga is based, though concentration begins 
with the controlled movement of the mind it can reach a state in 
which all movement or change stops. In this ultimate stage the 
mind becomes one with the essential nature of the object con- 
centrated upon and can thus move no further. 

Eastern psychology recognizes the uses of the ordinary type of 
concentration but it holds that there are two limitations in this 
kind of concentration. One is that the mind can never fully 
realize the essential nature of the object concentrated upon. 
However deep it may penetrate, it still touches only the fringe or 
superficial aspects of its nature and can never reach the core. 
The second limitation is that with this kind of concentration 
consciousness always remains confined within the prison-house of 
the intellect. It cannot be released from the limitations of the 
intellect to be able to function at the deeper levels through the 
subtler vehicles. For, to be able to jump from one plane to another 
the mind must be brought first to that condition in which it is 
without movement though ' shining ' with the object which holds 
the field of consciousness. This point has been elaborated else- 
where and we need not go further into it here. 

Let us now come to the particular stage of concentration 
dealt with in this Sutra. In Dharana as this first stage is called, the 
mind is confined within a limited sphere defined by the object 
which is being concentrated upon. The phrase Deia-Bandha means 
confinement within a territory which allows a limited freedom 
of movement. The mind is interned, as it were, within the limited 
mental territory and has to be brought back immediately if it 
strays out. The reason why a limited freedom of movement is 
possible when the mind is being concentrated upon a particular 
object will be seen if we remember that every object has innumer- 
able aspects and the mind can consider these aspects only one by 
one. So that, while it takes up one aspect after another it is 
moving and yet really fixed on the object of concentration. Or it 
may be that the object may involve a process of reasoning consist- 
ing of many steps connected logically, with each other and forming 
an integrated whole. Here also there can be movement without 
really leaving the object of concentration. It is only when the 
mind gets out of touch with the object and an unconnected and 



278 



section in (l, 2) 



irrelevant object enters it that DhSrand may be considered to be 
broken. The main work in Dhdrana therefore consists in keeping 
the mind continuously engaged in the consideration of the object 
and to bring it back immediately as soon as the connection is 
broken. The objective which the Sadhaka should place before 
himself is to reduce progressively the frequency of such interrup- 
tions and to eliminate them completely ultimately. But it is not 
only the elimination of interruptions which has to be aimed at but 
complete focussing of the mind on the object. Vague and blurred 
impressions should be replaced by sharply denned mental images 
by increasing the degree of alertness and power of attention. So, 
the condition of the mind during the period when it is engaged 
with the object is as important as the frequency of the interruptions 
which break the connection. But as the nature of this stage of 
concentration is generally understood we need not elaborate this 
point further. 



Tatra pratyayaikatanata dhyanam. 

cTW there; in that (place) HcM-M content of consciousness 
H+dHdl stretching or streaming unbrokenly as one EJrpT'T medita- 
tion; contemplation. 

2. Uninterrupted flow (of the mind) towards the 
object (chosen for meditation) is contemplation. 

It was pointed out in the previous Sutra that the Sadhaka 
should aim at eliminating the intruding thoughts which are called 
distractions and should see that such interruptions are reduced in 
frequency in a progressive manner. When he succeeds in elimi- 
nating the distractions completely and can continue the con- 
centration on the object without any interruptions for as long as 
he decides to do so he reaches the stage of Dhyana. It will be seen, 
therefore, that it is the occasional appearance of distractions in the 
mind which constitutes the essential difference between Dhdrana 



VIBHUTI PADA 



279 



and Dhyana. Since this Sutra is very important from the practical 
point of view let us first examine the significance of the various 
Samskrta words used in defining Dhyana. 

Let us first take the word Pratyaya which is used frequently in 
the Toga-Sutras. This word covers a wide range of notions such as 
concept, idea, cause etc., but in Togic terminology it is generally 
used for the total content of the mind which occupies the field of 
consciousness at a particular time. As the mind is capable of 
holding a large variety of objects simultaneously a word has to be 
used to denote all these objects taken together irrespective of their 
nature. Pratyaya is a technical word for this total content of the 
mind. In view of what has been said above about Dhdrana, it will 
be seen that this Pratyaya with which the mind remains in 
continuous contact in Dhyana is fixed and yet a variable thing. It 
is fixed in the sense that the area within which the mind moves is 
defined and remains the same. It is variable because within that 
limited area or sphere there is movement. A few illustrations will 
make this point clear. When a scientist focusses his microscope 
on a drop of dirty water the field of vision is defined and limited 
within a circle and he cannot see anything outside it. But within 
that circular patch of light there are constant movements of all 
kinds. Or, take a river which is flowing within well-defined banks. 
There is constant movement of the water and yet this movement 
is confined within the banks of the river. A person who looks at a 
river from an aeroplane sees a thing which is fixed and moving at 
the same time. These illustrations help us to understand the dual 
nature of the Pratyaya in Dhyana and the possibility of keeping the 
mind moving within the limits defined by the object of meditation. 

The Samskrta word Tatra means * in that place ' and obviously 
refers to the Deia or place or mental territory within which the 
.mind is confined. The mind has to remain united with the 
Pratyaya within the limits defined in Dhdrana. The mind of any 
person remains united with the Pratyaya while he is in waking 
consciousness. But not only is the Pratyaya changing all the time 
but the mental territory is also changing because the mind is 
flitting from one subject to another. 

Ekatdnata which means ' extending continuously or un- 
brokenly * refers to the absence of interruptions from distractions 



280 



SECTION HI (2, 3) 



which are present in Dharana. In fact, as pointed out above, 
continuity of the Pratyaya is the only thing which distinguishes 
Dharana from Dhyana from the technical point of view. This con- 
tinuity may be compared to the continuity of the flow of water in 
a river or that of oil being poured from one vessel into another. 
Why is it essential to achieve this kind of continuity before 
Samadhi can be practised? Because every break in the continuity 
means distraction and distraction means lack of adequate concen- 
tration and grip over the mind. If the mind is diverted from the 
chosen object it means that some other object has taken its placed 
for there must be continuity in the movement of the mind. It is 
only in Jfirodha that the continuity of the movement can be broken 
without any other object occupying the mind. Now, if a distrac- 
tion breaks the continuity, apparently, there is not much harm 
done, for the mind can take up the thread immediately and 
continue with its work of diving deep into the subject. But 
actually, the appearance of the distraction is not as innocuous as 
it appears. It shows the absence of sufficient grip over the mind 
and a corresponding lack in the depth of concentration. In 
practising Dharana it is found that as the depth of abstraction 
increases and the grip over the mind becomes stronger, the fre- 
quency with which the distractions appear becomes smaller. So, 
continuity should be regarded as a gauge for measuring the 
necessary control over the mind and intensity of concentration. 
The attainment of Dhyana Avastha shows that the mind is getting 
ready for the last stage and the real practice of Toga. Unless and 
until this condition is fulfilled the practice of Samadhi cannot be 
begun and the real secrets of Toga will remain hidden from the 
Sadhaka. 



\- 



t **H?H«Mflw WRlfk: I 



Tad evarthamatra-nirbhasam svariipa- 
sunyam iva samadhih. 

3%^ (cRT+^) the same 3T*T the ' object'; the thing being 
meditated upon Tn& only f?FflftT ' shining ' or appearing therein 



VIBHUTI PADA 



281 



^rer true or essential form MM empty ; void; cipher ^w as if 
*)Hlfy: (is) Samadhi; trance. 

3. The same (contemplation) when there is con- 
sciousness only of the object of meditation and not of 
itself (the mind) is Samadhi. 

Now we come to the last stage of the concentration of the 
mind. This marks the culmination of the previous preparation to 
make it fit to dive into the realm of realities which lie hidden 
behind the phenomenal world. The subject of Samadhi has been 
dealt with thoroughly in Section I. But in that Section its more 
general and deeper aspects were considered. In the present 
context it is therefore necessary to deal only with its introductory 
aspects especially with its relation to Dharana and Dhyana. On 
account of the unusual manner in which the subject of Samadhi 
has been dealt with by Patanjali it will be necessary for the student 
to study carefully its various aspects several times before he can 
grasp its essential nature and technique. But the time and mental 
energy which he spends will be worth while for he will acquire in 
this manner an understanding of the essentia] technique of Toga, 
the only technique which can unlock the gates of the world of 
Reality. 

When the state of Dhyana has been well established and the 
mind can hold the object of meditation without any distractions 
it is possible to know the object much more intimately than in 
ordinary thinking, but even then a direct knowledge of its very 
essence is not obtained and the reality hidden within the object 
seems to elude the Togi. He is like a general who has reached 
the very gates of the fort which he has to conquer but the gates 
are closed and he is unable to enter the fort. What is standing 
between him and the reality of the object which he wants to know? 
III-3 gives an answer to this question. The mind itself is pre- 
venting the realization of the very essence of the object of medita- 
tion. All the distractions have been completely eliminated and 
the consciousness is fully focussed on the object of meditation. 
How does the mind interfere with the realization of the very 



282 



SECTION III (3) 



VIBHUTI PADA 



283 



essence of the object? By interposing consciousness of itself between 
the reality hidden behind the object and the consciousness of the 
Yogi. It is this self-consciousness or subjectivity, pure and simple, 
which serves as a veil to keep it separated from the object and to 
hide the reality he is seeking. 

To understand how consciousness of the mind of itself can 
become a bar to further progress, let us recall how this self-consci- 
ousness interferes with intellectual work of the highest order. A 
great musician is able to create his best productions when he loses 
himself completely in his work. An inventor solves his greatest 
problems when he is not conscious of solving any problem. It is 
at such moments that these people get their inspirations and 
contact with what they are seeking, provided, of course, they have 
mastered the technique and their mind is fully concentrated. It 
is the disappearance of self-consciousness which somehow opens 
the door to a new world which they cannot enter normally. 

Something similar though at a much higher level takes place 
when Dhydna passes into Samadhi and the gate which leads into 
the world of realities opens. Patanjali calls this disappearance of 
the mind's awareness of itself as Svarupa sunyam iva. "The mind's 
" own-form " or essential nature disappears, as it were.' Let us 
examine this phrase carefully because each word in it is signifi- 
cant. What is Svarupa ? Everything in manifestation has , two 
forms. An external form expressing its superficial and (non- 
essential nature which is called Rupa and an internal' form (which 
constitutes the very essence or substance of its true nature jwhich 
is called its Svarupa. In the case of the mind in the state of jphydna 
the Rupa is the Pralyaya or the object of meditation. It is through 
this that the mind finds expression. The Svarupa is the residual 
consciousness of its own action or role in the process of Dhydna 
and is essentially the subjective nature of the mind. This consci- 
ousness steadily becomes weaker as Dhdrana. passes into Dhydna 
and the concentration of the mind in Dhydna increases. But still 
it is present, even though in a weak form, in all stages of Dhydna, 
and it is only when it disappears completely that Dhydna passes 
into Samadhi. 

The word Sunyam means a void or cipher and here it must be 
interpreted as cipher, because it is a question of reducing the 



s.t 



residual self-awareness to the vanishing point and not of emptying 
anything to the utmost limit. In feet, as the objects of meditation 
continue to fill the mind completely there can be no question of 
emptying the mind. Svarupa Sunyam therefore means reducing the 
self-awareness or the subjective role of the mind to the utmost 
limit. Lest the student may imagine that the Svarupa really dis- 
appears when the Samadhi takes the place of Dhydna the author 
adds the word Iva which means ' as if. The Svarupa only seems 
to disappear but does not in reality because when the Samddhi 
comes to an end it manifests again immediately. 

The question as to how it is possible to know the innermost 
nature of an object of meditation by fusing the mind with it is a 
very interesting one and has been dealt with fully in considering 
1-41. It will suffice to point out here that the apparent dis- 
appearance of the self-awareness means really dissolution of the 
subject-object relationship and their fusion in consciousness. With 
the disappearance of the mental Svarupa a faculty higher than the 
intellect comes into play, and the perception of the reality hidden 
behind the object takes place through the instrumentality of this 
faculty which perceives by becoming one with the object of per- 
ception. The perceiver, the object of perception and perception 
become fused in one state. 

When. the self-awareness has disappeared, what is left in the 
mind ? Only the object of meditation can remain, for all kinds of 
distractions have to be eliminated before the state of Dhydna can 
be firmly established. This is the meaning of the phrase Artha- 
mdtra-Mrbhdsam. The phrase Tad eva means 'the same' and is 
used here to emphasize the fact that Samadhi is merely an advanced 
phase of Dhydna and not a new technique. The only difference 
between them as we have seen is the absence of the mental self- 
awareness which makes the object shine in a new light. 

The difference between the three phases of the same process . 
which culminates in Samadhi may be represented in the following 
way. If A is the object chosen for Samyama and B, C, D, E, etc. are 
distractions, then the content of the mind at regular intervals of 
successive moments in the three phases may be represented by the 
following series of Pratyayas present in the mind. The circle round 
the letters represents the mental self-awareness referred to above. 



284 



SECTION III (3) 



VIBHUTI PXDA 



285 



1®®©©©©© ) ORDINARY THINKING 



>DHARANA 



3®®®®®®®®] 

4®®®®A®A®1 

5®A A A®A A® 

_ V dhyana 

6AAAAA®A® 
AAAAAAA®), 



7AAAAAAAA] 



• SAMAbHI 



8AAAAAAAAJ 



It will be seen that the frequency of distractions goes on decreasing 
in Dharand and frequency and degree of mental self-awareness 
goes on decreasing in Dhyara. In Samadhi there is complete 
freedom both from distractions and self-awareness and the object 
alone remains in the field of consciousness. It is true that further 
changes are possible but these changes are connected with the 
object itself and do not affect the two conditions which determine 
the state of Samadhi. But these further developments have been 
discussed in connection with 1-42-49. 

It will be seen that the transformations which take place in 
Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi are purely mental phenomena and 
are related to consciousness. The mind has already been dis- 
connected from the body and whatever takes place in the realm 
of the mind cannot be judged by the condition of the body. The 
physiological functions go on perfectly but there is no response of 
the body either to the world outside or inside. This lack of 
response to outer stimuli in the physical body in the state of Samadhi 
makes many people mistake ordinary trance for Samadhi. But mere 
trance cannot be a proof of the attainment of Samadhi. The body 



i 



becomes unresponsive in sleep or under the influence of anaesthe- 
tics or drugs. It also becomes unresponsive when, in the case of 
psychics, the subtler vehicles withdraw from the physical body and 
consciousness begins to function in the subtler world next to the 
physical. In all such cases the body is inert but the lower mind 
is functioning partially or fully in the next subtler vehicle. It is 
still under the full domination of distractions as before. The 
mental processes leading up to Samadhi take place in the lower 
mental body and require the quiescence of the lower vehicles. 
Therefore, the fact of a person being in real Samadhi is determined 
solely by the condition of his mind and not at all by the inertness 
of the physical body. 

It is necessary to draw attention to these obvious facts because 
those who are not well versed in the philosophy of Toga and 
dabble in lower psychism generally confuse the inertness of the 
physical body with Samadhi and a person who can manage to remain 
unconscious for any length of time is regarded as a great Yogi \ 
This condition of mere inertness is generally referred to as Jada- 
Samadhi and has really no relation with true Samadhi although 
outwardly they appear very much alike. A person who comes 
out of true Samadhi brings with him the transcendent knowledge, 
wisdom, peace and strength of the inner life while a person who 
comes out of Jada-Samadhi is no wiser than a person who comes 
out of sleep. Sometimes, when he is psychic he may be able to 
bring down into the physical brain clear or confused memory of 
some of his experiences on the next subtler plane but there is 
nothing remarkable Or reliable about these experiences and cer- 
tainly there is nothing in common with the transcendent knowledge 
which is gained in true Samadhi. 

The extent of ignorance prevailing with regard to these things 
is sometimes amazing. Sometime ago an article was published 
in a well-known Hindi journal dealing with the different stages of 
Samadhi. In this article were given a series of photographs of a 
Yogi supposed to be passing into different stages of Samadhi one 
after another. The series of photographs, as far as could be seen, 
merely showed an increasing dullness of the eyes but what was 
astounding was that they showed more and more physical light com- 
ing out of the physical body in the advanced stages of Samadhi ! 



286 



section in (3, 4) 



As if the light which dawns in the consciousness of the Togi in 
Samadhi can be photographed ! But such is the power of ignorance 
to distort and vulgarize the highest truths of life and to consider 
everything in terms of the physical which is the only part of life 
which is tangible and visible to the common man. 



Trayam ekatra samyamah. 

sPTiT the three rnfisT in one place; jointly WW. (is) Samyama; 
a technical word meaning Dhdrana, Dhyana and Samadhi taken 
together. 

4. The three taken together constitute Samyama. 

It should be clear from what has been said previously in 
dealing with Dhdrana, Dhyana and Samadhi that these are really 
different phases of the same mental process, each succeeding stage 
differing from the preceding in the depth of concentration which 
has been attained and the more complete isolation of the object 
of contemplation from distractions. The complete process begin- 
ning with Dhdrana and ending in Samadhi is called Samyama in Togic 
terminology and the practical mastery of its technique opens the 
door not only to knowledge of all kinds but also to powers and 
superphysical accomplishments known as Siddhis. 

It is necessary to keep in mind two facts about Samyama. 
First, it is a continuous process and the passage from one stage 
to another is not marked by any abrupt change in consciousness. 
Secondly, the time taken in reaching the last stage depends 
entirely upon the progress made by the Togi. The beginner may 
have to spend hours and days in reaching the final stage while 
the Adept can pass into it almost instantaneously and effortlessly. 
As Samadhi does not involve any movement in space but merely 
sinking, as it were, towards the centre of one's own consciousness, 
time is not an essential factor in the process. The time taken by 
the Togi is due entirely to the lack of mastery of the technique. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



287 



Taj-jayat prajiialokah. 

^T-^RRT by mastering it 5J*TT the higher consciousness 
3U<rfl+: light. 

5. By mastering it {Samyama) the light of the 
higher consciousness. 

It has already been pointed out in dealing with Samprqjndla 
Samadhi (1-17) that Prajna is the higher consciousness which 
appears in the state of Samadhi. But as the word Samadhi covers a 
wide range of states of consciousness, so Prajna stands for all the 
states of consciousness in Samadhi beginning with the. Vitarka stage 
and ending with the Asmitd stage. There are two critical stages 
in the subtilization of Prajna. One of these is referred to in 1-47 
where the light of spirituality irradiates the mental consciousness. 
The other is indicated in 111-36 when the consciousness of the 
Purusa begins to illuminate the Yogi's consciousness. . The role of 
Prajna comes to an end when Viveka Khydti or the pure awareness 
of Reality takes its place as indicated in I V-29. 

Tasya bhumisu viniyogah. 
3W its *jf*nj in stages fetPwWi: application; employment. 

6. Its (of Samyama) use by stages. 

This Sutra brings out another important fact about the appli- 
cation of Samyama. Samyama, as has been pointed out already, is 
the composite process of Dhdrana, Dhyana and Samadhi when applied 
to any object. But though the process will be essentially the same 
in every case, it will be more or less complicated according to the 
nature of the object to which it is applied. All objects in the 



288 



SECTION III (6) 



V1BHUTI PADA 



289 



Universe are not equally mysterious if we may say so. The 
mystery which is hidden behind them depends upon the depth of 
the reality in which they are rooted. Take, for example, the 
following objects: a piece of stone, a rose and a human being. All 
the three objects have their physical casing and although the 
physical particles constituting the physical form are progressively 
more organized as we pass from the first to the third, still, there is 
not much difference between them if we consider only their 
physical nature. But what a tremendous difference there exists 
between them when we try to go behind the outer forms in order to 
unravel the mystery which lies hidden within them! Any fool can 
see that there is some difference between them although all three 
of them are physically on the same level. A rose arouses even in 
the ordinary man thoughts and emotions which a stone can never 
do and the mystery which is hidden behind the human form is one 
of the eternal riddles of the Universe. Materialistic philosophy 
may use all the logic which it can command to prove that essenti- 
ally there is no difference between the objects except that of 
functions and structures and people may thoughtlessly repeat these 
dogmas of a mechanistic universe but in actual life nobody takes 
the^e dogmas seriously and even the rank materialist has to 
recognize and take into account these differences in his life. The 
voice of intuition cannot be silenced by these intellectual dogmas. 
What causes the differences between ' objects ' such as 
those mentioned above? Why is a rose a more mysterious object 
than a piece of stone and a human being infinitely more mysterious 
than a rose? To understand these differences it is necessary to 
bear in mind that the outer form of any physical or mental object 
is merely a covering of an inner reality and what we mentally see 
of the object does not constitute the totality of the object. As in 
the case of a ship the part which is submerged below the surface 
of water is much larger than the part that is visiblej in the same 
way, what we mentally see in an object is merely a small fraction 
of what is hidden from our view. The researches made in the 
domain of Science have brought to our knowledge by methods of 
experiment and reasoning a part of these hidden realities but what 
we have come to know in this manner is very little and 'of com- 
paratively less significance as compared with the totality of what 



lies beyond the range of scientific investigations. These submerged 
aspects of all objects can be exhaustively investigated only by the 
methods of Toga, and Samyama is the key which unlocks the doors 
of these hidden worlds. 

All objects in the manifested Universe, as has been pointed 
out already, are an expression of an Ultimate Reality but the roots 
of different objects lie at different levels of spirit-matter combina- 
tions through which this Reality is manifested. We may symbolize 
this fact diagrammatically by the following figure in which the 
centre of the concentric circles stands for the Ultimate Reality 
and the successive circles represent the different planes of existence 
in their increasing order of density. 




Fig. 8 

The objects A, B, C, D represented by arcs of the outermost 
circle will be seen to have their roots in progressively subtler planes 
of existence, while the object E will be seen to be rooted in the 
Ultimate Reality Itself. 

Taking the three objects mentioned above for comparison we 
can see easily that in the case-of a piece of stone we have a mere 
conglomeration of physical matter with no. design at its basis and 
19 



290 



section ra (6) 



so its roots cannot lie very deep. In the case of a rose also we 
have a conglomeration of different kinds of matter but this com- 
bination differs from that of a stone in two things. Firstly, it has 
the capacity for organic growth and decay inherent in it and 
secondly, its form corresponds to an archetype. Even to a super- 
ficial observer it should be obvious that a rose has got deeper 
roots in reality than a piece of stone. Coming to the human form 
we cannot help feeling that we are face to face with a profound 
mystery. We have here not only a more elaborate material 
structure but the form is the vehicle of complicated phenomena 
like thoughts and emotions and other aspects of consciousness. 
Whatever may be the nature and potentiality of human con- 
sciousness there cannot be the slightest doubt that the roots of a 
human being lie much deeper than those of a rose. How far they 
penetrate into the heart of the manifested Universe it is unneces- 
sary to discuss here. According to the philosophy upon which the 
Science of Toga is based they reach to the very Centre of Ultimate 
Reality. That is what the doctrine of the identical nature of 
Jivatmas and Paramdtmd really means. 

The fact that there are enormous differences in the inner 
complexity of objects must be kept in mind if we are to under- 
stand why the technique of Samyama is a very complicated science 
and has to be mastered in stages. Some objects touch as it were 
the mere surface of reality while others go down very deep into it. 
Though Samyama is needed to unravel the underlying mystery in 
all the cases it cannot be the same in actual practice. That is 
why there is a world of difference between the beginner who has 
just mastered the technique of Samadhi and the Adept who can 
almost instantaneously pass out into the highest realms of existence 
without much effort. The whole science of mathematics is based 
upon the four operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication 
and division but the beginner who has mastered these operations 
has very far to go before he can become an expert mathematician. 
In the language of the Toga-Sutras these different stages 
involved in the use of Samyama mean the attainment of the four 
successive stages of SampmjHata Samadhi mentioned in 1-17 and the 
stage of Nirbija Samadhi mentioned in 1-51. In the language of 
Occultism they mean the functioning of consciousness through 



VTBHUTI PADA 



291 



increasingly subtler vehicles referred to in connection with 1-17. 
But the fundamental basis of both is the same, namely, penetration 
into different depths of consciousness which finds expression through 
different grades of Citta. The Toga-Sutras deal with Samadhi from 
the functional point of View while Occultism deals with it from 
the structural point of View. That is why, outwardly, the two 
modes of treatment seem to differ. But the student who has 
grasped the nature of Samadhi will see that there is no essential 
difference between the two, because passing in Samadhi from one 
vehicle to another means coming into touch with the deeper levels 
and aspects of consciousness. The correspondences between these 
have been shown already in dealing with 11-19. 



V3. d*m«xK^ ^"¥3": I 

Tray am antarangam purvebhyah. 

WPf the three taken together 3p^rc^*T inner; internal ^prt: 
in relation to the preceding ones. 

7. The three are internal in relation to the pre- 
ceding ones. 

The three mental processes of Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi 
constitute Toga proper and the five preceding Angas may be con- 
sidered as merely preparatory. The whole process of Samyama 
takes place in the realm of the mind and no part of the visible 
man is involved in it. That is why it is called Antarangam. This 
should not, however, be considered to mean that the first five 
Angas which are external in relation to the last three are in any 
way not quite essential. In fact, without the preparatory work 
involved in the former it is impossible to undertake the more 
subtle and difficult task involved in the latter. At least, the essen- 
tial conditions which it is the object of the first five Angas to bring 
about must be produced though not necessarily by exactly the 
same means. They may be brought about by other Togic practices 
or by Isvara-Pranidhana as pointed out in 1-23. 



292 SECTION ni (8, 9) 

Tad api bahir-angam nirbljasya. 

<TcT that arfq" too ^f^<^H. external Pi<4T^t^M to the seedless 
(Samadhi). 

8. Even that (Sabija Samadhi) is external to the 
Seedless (Nirbija Samadhi). 

The subject of Nirbija Samadhi has already been dealt with in 
connection with 1-51. Various other matters connected with 
Nirbija Samadhi will also be discussed in Section IV. This Sutra 
has been introduced here only tc emphasize the distinction between 
Sabija and Nirbija Samadhi and to bring home to the student that 
Nirbija Samadhi is a more advanced stage on the path of Self- 
realization than Sabija Samadhi. Sabija Samadhi is concerned with 
knowledge and powers exercised within the realm of Prakrti on 
this side of the gate which leads to KaiJalya. Nirbija Samadhi, on 
the other hand, aims at transcending the realm of Prakrti and 
living in the state of Enlightenment implied in Kaivalya. The 
latter, therefore, is naturally internal in relation to the former. 
The Purusa has first to conquer all the realms of Prakrti through 
Sabija Samadhi and then, after conquering these realms, to gain 
complete Self-realization which makes him not only the Lord of 
these realms but also independent of them. 



£. o*1<*1MplO« 



f^r^i <=* m i ^"H T<=H ftfter- 



^"iRxiMAfi forty m Ohm: i 

Vyutthana-nirodha-samskarayor abhibha- 
va-pra durbhavau nirodha-ksana-cittan- 
vayo nircwiha-parinarnah. 

oik^H outgoing ; (that which is to disappear) fartST incoming ; 
(that which is opposing the outgoing impression) *TF!>K'ft: of the 



VIBHUTI PADA 



293 



impressions 3Tf*r*ra" suppression; becoming latent SU^hWI appear- 
ance faftsrerr (the unmodified state of the mind at) the moment 
of suppression f^rT mind 3p^T: permeation; pervasion fnOfcl 
suppression mP^IIH: transformation. 

9. Nirodha Parinama is that transformation of the 
mind in which it becomes progressively permeated by 
that condition of Nirodha which intervenes momentarily 
between an impression which is disappearing and the 
impression which is taking its place. 

After dealing with the three stages of meditation leading up to 
Samadhi Patanjali takes up the question of the three fundamental 
types of mental transformations which are involved in the practice 
of higher Toga. These four Sutras (III-9-12) bearing on this 
question are very important because they throw light on the 
essential nature of the mental processes which are involved in the 
practice of Toga and further elucidate the technique of Samadhi. 

The important point to note with regard to these three 
Parindmas is that they are not states but modes of transformation, 
or to put it in other words, they do not represent static but dynamic 
conditions. In the progressive process of Self-realization through 
Samadhi the mind can pass from one stage to another through 
the use of three and only three kinds of transformations which 
are sequentially related to one another and really constitute three 
integral parts of a larger composite process which has to be 
repeated on each plane as consciousness withdraws, step by step, 
towards the Centre of Reality. The ordinary transformations 
of the mind take place according to the laws of association or 
reasoning or according to the stimuli applied by the external 
world through the sense-organs. The three kinds of transfor- 
mations we are now considering are of a special kind and are 
used only in the practice of higher Toga after the Yogi has acquired 
the capacity of passing into the Samadhi state at will. 

The Sutra under discussion defines Nirodha Parinama or trans- 
formation which results in suppression of Citta-Vrttis. In view of 



294 



section in (9) 



the fact that Toga is described in 1-2 as the suppression of Citta- 
Vrltis it is easy to see how important it is to understand this Sutra 
thoroughly. As soon as control of the mind is begun Ktrodha 
comes into play. The word Nirodha in Samskrta means both 
restraint and suppression and the earlier efforts at control of the 
mind beginning with Dharand involve Nirodha not so much in the 
sense of suppression as that of restraint. But a little careful 
thought will show that even in the preliminary practice of Dharand, 
Nirodha, in the sense of suppression, is involved to a certain extent. 
In trying to practise Dharana the will is trying all the time to 
suppress distractions and substituting in their place the one object 
on which meditation is to be performed. It will be obvious to 
anyone that in each of these efforts to replace a distraction by 
the chosen object there must be a momentary state in which 
neither the distraction nor the chosen object is present and the 
mind is really without any Pratyaya, just as when the direction 
of a moving object is suddenly reversed there must be a moment 
when the object is not moving but is at rest. It is because Nirodha 
in this limited sense enters the problem of controlling the mind 
from the very beginning that Patanjali h?.s taken up Nirodha 
Parinama first in his treatment of the subject but it should be noted 
that true Nirodha or complete suppression is the last in the cycle 
of transformations and comes after Samadhi Parinama and Ekdgratd- 
Parindma in actual practice. 

We have seen that Nirodha is that momentary unmodified 
state of the mind which intervenes when one impression which 
holds the field of consciousness is replaced by another impression; 
The impression which holds the field of consciousness is called 
Vyutthdna Samskara and the impression which opposes or tries to 
replace the Vyutthana. Samskara is called Nirodha Samskara in this 
Sutra. Between two successive impressions there must be a 
momentary state in which the mind has no. impression at all or is 
present in an unmodified condition. The object of Nirodha 
Parinama is to produce at will this momentary state and gradually 
extend it, so that the mind can exist for a considerable duration 
in this unmodified state. This extension of the Niruddha state by 
repeated efforts has been expressed by the phrase Nirodha-Ksana- 
Cittanvaya which means ' permeation of the mind by the momentary 



VIBHUTI PADA 



295 



state of Nirodha or complete suppression of Vrttis '. Nirodha 
Parinama comprises the whole process beginning with the first effort 
at suppression of the ' seed. ' and ending with the firm establish- 
ment of the Niruddha state The Yogi should be able to maintain 
the Niruddha state for a sufficiently long time to enable conscious- 
ness to pass through the ' cloud ' or void arid emerge into the 
next plane. 

In passing from a condition in which the ' seed ' of Samadhi 
holds the field of consciousness to a condition of complete Nirodha 
there is a struggle between two opposite tendencies, the tendency 
of the ' seed ' to rise again in the field of consciousness and the 
tendency of the mind to remain in a condition of Nirodha. No 
other distraction can rise and occupy the field of consciousness 
because that tendency has already been eliminated in the previous 
two processes of Samadhi Parinama and Ekagratd Parinama. Samadhi 
Parinama has eliminated the tendency of distractions to appear in 
the field of consciousness and. Ekagratd Parinama has established 
the tendency of the same impression — the ' seed '■ — to persist with- 
out interruption. That is why, when the force of will is applied 
to suppress the. ' seed ', it is only that particular seed which can 
appear again. This will also show why the Samadhi and Ekagratd 
states must be attained before the will can be applied to produce 
the Niruddha state. If these techniques have not been mastered 
then after every effort of suppression a new Pratyaya or distraction 
may arise as happens in the case of the ordinary man who tries to 
practise Nirodha. The student will also be able to understand 
now the significance of the phrase Abhydsa Purvah in 1-18, for 
Asamprajnata Samadhi is nothing but the state of the mind in which 
the Pratyaya or ' seed ' lias been made to disappear by the practice 
of Nirodha. This condition of Nirodha is not a state of ordinary 
mental vacuum, but a state of Samadhi in which the Togi is in 
complete control of the mind. 

The first effort to suppress the ' seed ' of Samprajndta Samadhi 
produces a void only momentarily. The tendency of the ' seed ' 
to emerge again into consciousness is so strong owing to the pre- 
vious practice of Ekagratd that it again takes possession of the mind 
and transforms it into its own image. The repetition of the effort 
at suppression, however, makes it slightly easier every time to 



296 



SECTION in (9, 10) 



bring about the Niruddha state and maintain the mind in that 
state a little longer. Continued practice of this kind gradually 
increases the tendency of the mind to remain in the Niruddha 
state and weakens the tendency of the ' seed ' to reappear in the 
field of consciousness as pointed out in the next Sutra. 

A simple physical experiment will serve, perhaps, to illustrate 
the opposition of the two tendencies referred to above. OB is a 
rod attached to a stand OA and kept in the position OB by a 
spring at C. 




Fig. 9 
If a child is asked to press the rod OB to the position OA he may 
be able to bring it to that position with difficulty and may be able 
to touch the stand OA only momentarily in the first attempt. 
Each successive attempt will, however, make it easier for him to 
bring the rod in the position OA and keep it in that position 
longer. And with sufficient practice the child may learn to keep 
the rod in the position OA as long as he likes. The tendency of 
the rod to spring upwards has been completely mastered by 
practice. In the same way the tendency of the ' seed ' to spring 
back into the field of consciousness can be mastered by sufficient 
practice and the Niruddha state maintained for a sufficient length 
of time for the consciousness to pass through the Laya centre and 
emerge into the next higher plane. 

To. ^W H9IMc||%1l *R+KI<^ I 

Tasya prasanta-vahita sarpskarat. 

?RT its (of Nlrodha Pari^dma) 5T9TRT peaceful; tranquil; 
undisturbed 4l%ll flow Ut+Kld by (repeated) impression. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



297 



10. Its flow becomes tranquil by repeated 
impression. 

The meaning of this Sutra will be clear from what has been 
said in connection with the previous Sutra. The tendency of the 
mind to remain in the Niruddha state also grows with practice and 
ultimately becomes so strong by the force of Samskdras that it can 
remain in that condition easily for any length of time. The 
significance of the phrase Praidnta Vdhitd should be noted. The 
flow of this Niruddha state becomes, after sufficient practice, easy 
and peaceful. There is no struggle which may be present in some 
degree in the earlier stages when the tendency has not been 
established firmly. Such a struggle would produce an unstable 
condition of the mind which is utterly unsuited for the purpose 
which has to be accomplished. 

It may be pointed out here that the resistance encountered 
from the mind in bringing about the different transformations is 
due not so much to the mind itself as to the Samskdras of Vdsands 
still hidden within it. If these have been removed to a sufficient 
degree the passage from one condition to another, can take place 
without much resistance. In fact, if Vairdgya has been developed 
to a high degree the necessary changes may be brought about 
with comparative ease as shown by the life of great spiritual 
teachers of the world. That is why the Togi has to rise on the 
two wings of Vairdgya and Abhydsa as pointed out in 1-12. Even 
in the last stage when Dharma-Megka-Samddhi is practised (IV-29) 
for the attainment of Kaivalya it is the practice of extreme Vairdgya 
which destroys the remaining Samskdras of the subtlest Vdsands and 
liberates the consciousness of the Togi. 

<\<\. *H?*kklild4l: SUfMl farl^M *rmfsT- 



Sarvarthataikagratayoh ksayodayau cit- 
tasya samadhi-paririamah. 

fl^T^d!- ' all-objectness '; many-pointedness; a state of mental 
distraction -l£4>lild41: of one-pointedness; of concentratedness 



298 



SECTION III (11, 12) 



Spfteft decay and rise farTFT of the mind *PTTf£T trance Mfc"im : 
transformation. 

11. Samddhi transformation is the (gradual) set- 
ting of the distractions and simultaneous rising of 
one-pointedness. 

The second kind of mental transformation which is involved 
in the different stages of Samddhi is Samddhi Parinama. This trans- 
formation really begins with the practice of Dharana and continues 
until the Ekagrata state is reached. As the definition of Samddhi 
Parinama given by the author shows, its essential nature is the 
gradual reduction of the all-pointed condition of the mind to the 
one-pointed condition. First, the series of objects which in the 
case of the ordinary man occupy the mind, one after another, are 
replaced by one chosen object, the ' seed ' of Samddhi. All the 
other objects except the object chosen for Samyama which are 
technically called ' distractions ' are eliminated completely when 
Dhydna is perfected. Then begins a new kind of movement or 
transformation of the mind in which consciousness begins to move 
in depth, as it were, and the object is denuded of its coverings or 
non-essential elements like name or form. The 'seed' is split 
open and its different layers exposed in order to get at the core 
which is its Svarupa. When this process which is dealt with in 1-43, 
has been completed and the object ' shines ' in the mind in its 
real Svarupa there is nothing further which can be done on that 
plane. The attainment of the Nirvitarka stage marks the com- 
pletion of the Samddhi Parinama as far as the Vitarka stage of 
Samprajndta Samddhi is concerned. If the mind is kept concentrated 
on the object it can merely reproduce the irreducible Svarupa of the 
object. Here the Ekagrata Parinama which is dealt with in the 
next Sutra begins. 



H- 



CRT: 5?T: ¥ll*dlfed1 ^Mc-M^l farTWfTTWT- 
h(\u||H: I 

Tatah punah santoditau tulya-pratyayau 
cittasyaikagrata-parinamah. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



299 



<TcT: then |pr: again sn^T-^fcdl subsided and uprisen ^(- 
equal; exactly similar 5RT*ft cognitions; contents of the mind at 
two different moments farTST of the mind l^+lildl one-pointed- 
ness qftTTT: transformation. 

12. Then, again, the condition of the mind in 
which the * object ' (in the mind) which subsides is 
always exactly similar to the ' object ' which rises (in 
the next moment) is called Ekagrata Parinama. 

The characteristic of the Ekdgratd-Parindma, which as we have 
seen is the consummation of the Samddhi Parinama, is that exactly 
the same Pratyaya rises in the field of consciousness again and 
again and produces the impression as if a single fixed unchanging 
Pratyaya is occupying the field. The succession of exactly similar 
images in an apparently stationary Pratyaya is due to the inter- 
mittent nature ot the manifested Universe which has been briefly 
explained in connection with IV-33. The whole Universe appears 
and disappears alternately but the interval called a Kfana is so. 
small that it appears to be a continuous phenomenon. We see a 
continuous glow in an electric bulb with an alternating current 
but we know that the glow is discontinuous and periods of illumi- 
nation follow periods of darkness alternately at very short intervals. 
It is not only in Samddhi that this discontinuity enters in the 
perception of the Pratyaya. It is present in all perceptions and 
thinking right from the plane of the lower mind up to the Atmic 
plane. Wherever there is manifestation there must be discontinuity 
or succession which is called Kramah in 111-15 and IV-33. 

The projection of a cinematographic picture on a screen may 
serve to illustrate, to some extent, the difference between the three 
Parinamas. The moving picture on the screen is produced, as is 
explained in connection with IV-33, by a succession of dissimilar 
images falling on the screen at intervals of less than 1/1 Oth second. 
This produces an illusion of continuity while there is actual dis- 
continuity in the projection. If all the pictures on the film 
roll are made exactly similar there will be one stationary and 
unchanging image produced on the screen. But we know that 



300 



SECTION III (12, 13) 



the appearance of such a stationary and unchanging image is an 
illusion. What we see as an unchanging image is composed of a 
number of similar {Tulya) images following each other so rapidly 
as to be indistinguishable. If we slow down the speed of projection 
sufficiently the illusion will disappear and we shall be able to see 
similar images following each other at regular intervals. In the 
same way the Pratyaya of Ekagrata Parinama remains apparently 
the same but in reality it is composed of a series of similar {Tulya) 
Pratyayas following each other at inconceivably high speed. It is 
because the phenomenon is dynamic and not static that it is calle'd 
a Parinama (transformation) and not Avastha (state). 

Now, if we suppose that even this picture which produces an 
unchanging image on the screen is removed and each portion of 
the film corresponding to a single picture is quite transparent it is 
obvious that a uniform illumination will be seen on the screen. 
Here the analogy breaks down. The dropping or suppression of 
the Pratyaya of Ekagrata Parinama by means of Mirodha does not 
produce the illumination of Reality but the consciousness of the 
next subtler plane and the whole cycle of the three Parinamas has 
to be repeated again on this plane to enable the consciousness to 
pass again into the next subtler plane. It is only when the 
Pratyaya of the last plane (Atmic) is dropped or suppressed that the 
illumination of Reality or consciousness of the Purusa dawns. 

The reason for the emergence of a Pratyaya of the next subtler 
plane when the « seed ' present in Ekagrata Parinama is suppressed 
is to be sought in the nature of the complex mechanism through 
which consciousness functions on the different planes and the 
nature of the Samskdras which bind consciousness to ils vehicles 
Theoretically, the Nirodha which follows the Ekagrata state should 
lead to direct contact with Reality but this does not happen. As 
this question has been dealt with at another place (1-18) it is not 
necessary to enter into it here. 

T3- ^r ^nP-s^ snfw^'j|N^mr<u||^i 

Etena bhutendriyesu dharma-laksana- 
vastha-parinama vyakhyatah. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



301 



l^T by this W (in) the elements ^PjJ*J«f in the sense- 
organs snf property *reTT character <*H**U condition qfruTPTT: 
transformations; changes °H\^M\: are explained. 

13. By this (by what has been said in the last 
four Sutras) the property, character, and condition- 
transformations in the elements and the sense-organs 
are also explained. 



Since the mind gets its- raw material for thinking from the 
Bhutas through the instrumentality of the Indriyas it follows that, 
corresponding to the three Parinamas dealt with previously in 
relation to Citta, there must be analogous Parinamas in the field of 
Bhutas and Indriyas also. These Parinamas are referred to in this 
Sutra, firstly, to emphasize their all-pervading character in every 
field of Prakrti and, secondly, to facilitate the understanding of the 
modus operandi of many Siddhis which are dealt with in the remain- 
ing portion of. this Section. Transformations of every kind in 
Nature are based according to Togic philosophy on the changes in 
Gunas and must therefore be governed by laws which are funda- 
mentally the same. It is easy to understand, therefore, that the 
laws governing the three types of transformations which are 
utilized in the control and manipulation of Citta in Togic prac- 
tice must also hold true in the field of Bhutas and Indriyas. But, 
. owing to the difference in the medium, their mode of working, 
though analogous, will not be the same. Just as mastery over the 
technique of the three kinds of transformations in the field of Citta 
enables the Togi to control and manipulate the working of Citta, in 
the same way, mastery over this technique in the field of Bhutas 
and Indriyas enables him to control and manipulate natural 
phenomena. He can then exercise extraordinary powers which 
are called Siddhis. 

Patafyali has merely referred to the applicability of the three 
laws of transformation to the field of Bhutas and Indriyas without 
elucidating the idea further. The student is expected to work out 
the analogous relationships himself. Let us see how this can be 



302 



SECTION III- (13) 



done taking into consideration what has been said in relation to 
the functioning of Citta. 

Let us take the field of Bhutas or elements first. As has been 
explained elsewhere (11-19) it is by the action of Bhutas on the 
Indriyas that sensuous perception takes place. What is the action 
of Bhutas due to in the last analysis? Obviously, to the physical 
and chemical properties of different kinds of matter. It is these 
properties which make us see colours, hear sounds and produce the 
innumerable sensations which form the raw material of our mental 
life. It is these properties which are inherent in matter and appear 
under difFerent conditions which are the specific instruments of 
Bhutas and by their action on the Indriyas proauce all kinds of 
sensuous perceptions. These properties in their totality are called 
Dharma in the present context. 

According to the Yogic conception of matter all kinds of 
chemical and physical properties are not separate properties of 
different elements and compounds which Science has discovered. 
They inhere in one parent substance. The difFerent elements 
and compounds merely serve as vehicles for making manifest the 
properties which are latent in the parent substance. This basic 
medium or repository of all properties is called Dharmi in the next 
Sutra. 

What is the significance of the three Parindmas in relation to 
the Bhutas? Corresponding to Mrodha Parinama of Citta there will 
be reduction to the state of Dharmi, the basic medium in which all 
the properties have become latent and the Dharmi is present in a 
perfectly quiescent state. Corresponding to the Samadhi Parinama 
of Citta there will be a concentration towards a particular set of 
properties instead of the properties changing continously in a 
haphazard manner according to the prevailing natural conditions. 
Corresponding to Ekdgrata Parinama of Citta there will be a" 
stationary state in which one particular set of properties holds the 
field for the time being or the Dharmi remains in exactly the same 
state for a certain period. 

The continuous changes in matter which are brought about 
by natural forces correspond to the condition of the ordinary mind 
which passes from one object to another in a haphazard manner 
according to the laws of mental association. Changes in matter 



VIBHUTI PADA 



303 



which are brought about by deliberately regulating the conditions 
in a particular way are analogous to Samadhi Parinama. This may 
be done either by the regulation of the external conditions, as is 
done by a scientist, or by going to the source of all properties and 
manipulating them from there, as is done by a Yogi. In the latter 
kind of technique lies the secret of many Siddhis such as Bhuta Jaya 
dealt with in 111-45. 

Since the sense-organs merely convert the properties which 
are present in an active form in the Dharmi into the corresponding 
sensations, the Parindmas in the field of Indriyas are merely the 
counterparts of the Parindmas in the field of Bhutas and the analo- 
gous relationships can be worked out easily. We have merely to 
substitute Laksana or characteristics in place of Dharma or proper- 
ties. In this field also the Yogi who can perform Samyama can 
trace back the sensations to their ultimate source and acquire 
complete control over the sense-organs as shown in 111-48. 

It is easy to understand what is Dharma Parinama and Laksana 
Parinama because these fall within the range of our common 
experience. What is Avastha Parinama? Avastha means state and 
Avastha Parinama is therefore change of state. To understand the 
significance of this kind of transformation we should turn to 111-45 
and III -48. The Bhutas and Indriyas exist in five states, each of 
the successive state mentioned being subtler than the preceding 
one. In fact, the grossest form of the Bhutas or Indriyas is derived 
by the progressive condensation of the subtlest form through the 
intermediate three stages and can therefore be again reduced to 
the subtlest form by reversing the process. These changes from 
one state to another are referred to in the present Sutra as Avastha 
Parinama and are analogous to the three kinds of Parindmas which 
can be brought about by the Yogi in relation to properties and 
characteristics. This kind of transformation is beyond the range 
of common experience and can be utilized only through the 
practice of Samyama* 

!§antoditavyapades*ya-dharmanupatI 
dharmi. 



304 



SECTION III (14) 



5TRT the subsided ; the latent ^Rd the uprisen ; the manifest 
Si«4h^m the unmanifest; as yet in the future gpR" the properties 
^•iMm"! correlated; common to Epff the substratum in which the 
properties inhere. 

14. The substratum is that in which the pro- 
perties — latent, active or unmanifest — inhere. 

As has been pointed out already in the last Sutra all properties 
of different elements whether manifest or unmanifest, are con- 
sidered to inhere in, and to be derived from one substratum which 
is called Dharmi. This substratum which is the root of all pro- 
perties is none other than Prakrti. When a particular property 
disappears we may say that it has become latent in Prakrti. When 
it becomes manifest we may say that it has taken an active form 
in Prakrti. So the appearance and disappearance of all kinds of 
properties in Nature through the medium of different elements 
and compounds is merely a question of their being manifest or 
unmanifest. All of them are present eternally in Prakrti and can ■ 
be made active or latent by bringing about the necessary conditions. 

The view that all natural phenomena are due to the continual 
appearance and disappearance of all kinds of properties in a 
substratum which is their repository may appear fantastic to 
people familiar with modern scientific ideas but deeper thought 
will show the fascinating nature of this idea and convince the 
student that it is not as absurd as it appears on first sight. In fact, 
those who are in touch with the latest developments in Science 
and are familiar with the trends of modern scientific thought will 
see in these developments a closer approach to the Togic doctrine 
than to materialism. The fact that all elements are composed of 
a few fundamental types of particles like the protons and electrons, 
that mass and energy are interconvertible and other discoveries of 
this nature have really shaken the foundations of orthodox mate- 
rialism and shown that the doctrines on which the Togic philosophy 
is based are not after all as fantastic as they appear at first sight. 
The theory that the properties of all elements depend upon the 
number and arrangement of the electrons in those elements is 



VIBHUTI PAPA 



305 



only one or two steps removed from the doctrine that all proper- 
ties of matter are derived from, and exist in a potential form in a 
substratum. 

Kramanyatvam parinamanyatve hetuh. 

WJ succession; underlying process; natural law 3HTc^ differ- 
ence; variety H'f< u im transformation; change 3JtAM in variation 
or difference ^: cause. 

1 5. The cause of the difference in transformation 
is the difference in the underlying process. 

The progress of modern Science has shown conclusively that 
behind various phenomena which we observe in different spheres 
of life there is a hidden framework of laws of Nature which bring 
about and regulate these phenomena with mathematical precision. 
Formerly, man was mystified by natural phenomena and as he did 
not know that they were based on natural laws he felt helpless 
before them. But the advent of Science, and the discovery of 
natural laws to which it has led, has given him power and con- 
fidence. He knows that if he can find the underlying laws in any 
sphere of natural phenomena he can control and manipulate them 
with utter certainty. He also knows that behind the external 
changes which he observes there are inner processes which bring 
about and account for the external changes, and much of the 
scientific work which is being done these days aims at tracing these 
inner processes and through their control and manipulation bring- 
ing about any desired result in the physical world. 

It is this idea of a hidden process or natural sequence under- 
lying the multifarious phenomena of Nature which is embodied in 
the Sutra under discussion. The Sarriskrta word Krama almost 
exactly expresses the idea behind a law of Nature. A law of Nature 
is nothing but a particular invariable order and manner in which 
things happen under a particular set of circumstances. We do 
20 



306 



SECTION III (15) 



not know really why things happen in certain ways under certain 
circumstances. We only know how they happen and an exact 
formulation of this mode of action is a law of Nature. This is also 
the essential idea behind the word Krama operating in the field of 
natural phenomena. The previous Sutra points out that all pheno- 
mena whether brought about by the action of natural forces or by 
the will of the Yogi are due to the appearance and disappearance 
of the corresponding properties in Prakrti. This Sutra emphasizes 
that these changes do not take place in a haphazard manner but 
according to definite and exact natural laws which determine with 
mathematical precision the manner and order of the changes. 

The need of bringing home to the student this important fact 
will be seen if we remember that all the following Sutras of this 
Section deal with different kinds of Siddhis which can be acquired 
by the practice of Samyama. Some of these powers or ?ttainments 
are of such an extraordinary nature that the student might well 
get away with the idea that they are acquired by some miraculous 
means. This would not only give an incorrect idea with regard 
to the nature of these attainments but also undermine the con- 
fidence of the Yogi in his ability to acquire them by Yogic processes. 
For there is always an element of uncertainty associated with the 
idea of miracles. A miracle may or may not happen. But a 
scientific process must produce the desired result if the right con- 
ditions-are provided* It is the scientific nature of Yogic technique 
which provides the guarantee for success through them. 

It is especially necessary to emphasize this fact because of the 
strange attitude of the present-day scientists towards all pheno- 
mena which are not of a purely physical character and cannot be 
dealt with in a scientific laboratory through physical instruments. 
They not only distrust all things which cannot be investigated 
through physical instruments; they also consider them outside 
the realm of law. To them only physical phenomena are governed 
by natural laws. All other phenomena connected with the mental, 
psychic and spiritual experiences of mankind belong implicitly to 
a world of chaos in which there are no definite and exact laws and 
therefore no possibility of investigating them in a scientific manner. 

The Yogic philosophy takes a more sensible and scientific view. 
It considers the whole of the manifested Universe as a cosmos. It 



VIBHUTI PADA 



307 



declares emphatically that all phenomena within this Universe — 
superphysical as well as physical — are subject to natural laws which 
work with mathematical precision. It provides the means by 
which the superphysical phenomena can be investigated and the 
underlying laws discovered. The student is thus not only free to 
decide which is the more rational view of the Universe but also to 
test by his own experiences and experiments which is the correct 
view. 

Parinama-traya-samyamad atitanagata- 
jfianam. 

hR«ii-h transformations sPT the three fl'qq i ^r by performing 
Samyama on 3^ffcr past wn*tt future ?TR1T knowledge. 

16. By performing Sainyama on the three kinds of 
transformations (Nirodha, Samadhi and Ekagrata) knowl- 
edge of the past and future. 

Beginning with 111-16 the remaining Sutras of this Section 
deal with the Siddhis or attainments which can be acquired by the 
practice of Samyama. Before dealing with the individual Sutras it 
is necessary to point out a few facts, by way of introduction, on this 
difficult but interesting subject. The word Siddhis is used generally 
for the extraordinary powers acquired through the practice of 
Yoga but its real meaning is best expressed by the words ' attain- 
ments ' or ' accomplishments ' connected with the superphysical 
worlds. It is chiefly in this latter sense that the word Siddhis 
should be taken in the present context because many of the Siddhis 
dealt with in the latter portion of this Section are concerned with 
the attainment of the highest states of consciousness and not with 
the development of occult powers as they are usually called. In 
these introductory remarks it is possible only to touch upon the 
more general and important aspects of the subject which will 
enable the student to see Siddhis in their correct perspective in the 
life of the Yogi. 



308 



SECTION m (16) 



The first point that may be noted with regard to occult 
powers as distinguished from the more important -attainments in 
higher Toga is the comparative unimportance of the former. These 
have a peculiar fascination for the neophyte who has merely 
acquired a superficial interest in the subject, but the more 
thoroughly he understands the philosophy of Toga the more is his 
interest transferred to the final objective. When an ordinary 
student gets interested in Toga he is still under the domination of 
ordinary desires, the desire for power and fame being one of them. 
He may not be conscious of this desire but deep down in his 
sub-conscious mind it lurks ready to come up when favourable 
conditions present themselves. Now, in the practice of Toga his 
lower self sees an opening for acquiring extraordinary and spectac- 
ular powers of all kinds and in this lies in many cases the secret 
of the fascination which Toga exercises on many people. But, if 
the student makes a deeper study of the subject he realizes that 
the Togic philosophy is based on the philosophy of Klesas and the 
occult powers which interested him so much are also part of that 
illusory side of life which it is the object of Toga to transcend. 
The exercise of occult powers does not free him from the basic 
illusions of life and therefore cannot bring him Enlightenment 
and peace. Rather it tends to distract the mind more powerfully 
from his true goal and may bring about his downfall in the most 
Unforeseen manner. It is only when he has completely conquered 
his lower nature and acquired true Vairagya that he can safejy 
exercise these powers for the helping of others, if necessary. Till 
then his interest in them should be merely scientific; as adding to 
the wonder and mystery of life which surrounds him and helping 
him to unravel that mystery. So when he finds these powers 
appearing spontaneously or as a result of the practice of Samyama 
he confines their use strictly to scientific purposes and maintains 
an attitude of utter indifference towards them. 

The fact that real Togis do not take the slightest pleasure or 
pride in the exercise of occult powers which they possess and 
refuse to yield to the common and vulgar desire of people to see 
'miracles' probably accounts for the fact that they remain 
unknown to the outer world and the realities of the Togic life have 
never been established to the complete satisfaction of the modern 



VIBHUTI PADA 



309 



psychologist. The ordinary man who rushes out into publicity to 
proclaim any unusual ability or power that he may acquire cannot 
understand how any person can possess some of the most extra- 
ordinary Togic powers and yet not even let other people know that 
he is in any way different from other people. He, therefore, 
naturally concludes that because such powers have never been 
exhibited in public under test conditions, they either do not exist 
or those who can exercise them are no longer living in the world. 
But a careful study of history and other relevant literature will 
prove conclusively that such powers have been exercised by people 
in practically all ages. And a persistent search among people who 
are in this line may also convince the student that there are people 
living in the present who can exercise these powers even though 
they may be difficult to find and may refuse to show these powers 
to any except those who are their tried and trusted disciples. Of 
course, there are present everywhere charlatans who pose as Togis 
and dupe gullible people to serve their selfish and nefarious ends. 
There are also people who have acquired some of the lower Siddhis 
and who go about making an exhibition of these for the satisfaction 
of their petty vanities or for earning money. Though these people 
pose as great Togis their vanity and worldly attitude betrays them 
and reveals their true status in Togic life. The practice of higher 
Toga and the unfoldment of spiritual life are the only sure means 
of coming into touch with true Togis who are masters of this 
Science of sciences and who can undoubtedly exercise all the 
Siddhis mentioned in the Toga-Sutras. 

The second important point to be borne in mind with regard 
to Siddhis is that their modus operandi can be explained only on the 
basis of Togic psychology and those who try to fit into the extremely 
superficial and rather materialist framework of modern psychology 
the grand and all-inclusive facts of Togic Science try to attempt 
an impossible task. Modern Science in the first flush of achieve- 
ment, and owing to the capacity to produce spectacular results in 
the field of physical phenomena, may presume to pronounce judg- 
ments on the fundamental problems of life but as it knows 
practically nothing about these facts of the inner life its verdicts 
and opinions about them have no value except in the eyes of those 
who are, for the time being, hypnotized by the materialistic 



310 



SECTION III (16) 



philosophy and are satisfied with a purely materialistic interpre- 
tation of the Universe. 

This is not the place to deal at any length with the psychology 
upon which the whole structure of Togic Science is based. The 
student will have to piece together the elements of this psychology 
from the relevant Sutras scattered throughout the book and fill up 
the gaps by a careful and comprehensive study of other Eastern 
philosophical systems. He will then see that the philosophy and 
psychology upon which Togic Science is based is the only one 
which is comprehensive enough to provide a sufficiently broad 
base for this Science. He will also realize that modern psychology 
which confines its investigations to the expressions of mind and 
consciousness through the imperfect and limited physical vehicle 
and is afraid of losing contact with the physical world in its in- 
vestigations, is utterly inadequate for this purpose. Those who 
refuse to leave the shores of the physical world must content 
themselves with the limited knowledge and resources which they 
have got and should not sit in judgment on the experiences of 
those who have ventured on the high seas and found limitless 
lands of unimaginable splendour. 

The best way of getting an insight into the modus operandi of 
Siddhis is to consider knowledge and power as two aspects of the 
same reality so that anyone who has the knowledge with regard 
to the inner working of any set of phenomena has also the 
power to manipulate those phenomena. There is nothing irrational 
in this assumption because the control and manipulation of physi- 
cal forces by modern science follows the discovery of the physical 
laws underlying those forces. But Science has knowledge of only 
physical forces and can therefore control only physical phenomena. 
The Yogi acquires knowledge of the far subtler and powerful forces 
of mind and consciousness and can, therefore, exercise powers 
connected with those inner forces. And since mental forces lie 
also at the basis of physical forces he can manipulate even physi- 
cal phenomena without using any physical aids. 

It has been pointed out already in the previous Sutra that 
according to the Togic philosophy the whole of the manifested 
Universe, seen and unseen, is governed by natural laws and there- 
fore there is no place for ' miracles ' in this philosophy. When 



VIBHUTI PADA 



311 



things are made to take place in a way which appears miraculous 
to the ordinary observer this is done by using forces which are 
still under the domain of natural law, though yet unknown to 
modern Science. There is, and can be, no violation of natural 
law, but it is possible to do things which seem to violate physical 
laws by employing laws of the superphysical realms. No one 
imagines that the law of gravitation is violated when a rocket soars 
into the sky. Why should it be necessary to assume that a 
miracle has happened when a man rises in the air by the practice 
of Pranayama or disappears from our sight as indicated in III -21 ? 

To deny the existence of these powers because modern 
Science cannot accept or explain them is to attribute to the 
scientist omniscience which he himself does not claim. To assert 
that powers attributed to Toga are not possible is not justified even 
from the scientific point of view. Things which were considered 
impossible before are passing into the realms of possibility as a 
result of new facts and laws which we are discovering. Scientists 
would do well to remember that they have not made the facts and 
laws, the discovery of which has enabled them to do so many 
marvellous things. They have merely discovered those facts. How 
can they say what other facts and laws are hidden within the bosom 
of Nature ? The scientist may or may not show the true scienti- 
fic spirit and humility which is a part of that spirit. But the true 
Togi who discovers the infinitely more fascinating facts and powers 
of the inner worlds always attributes them to the Divine Life 
enshrined within him and in the world around him and when he 
uses those powers he uses them as an agent of that Life. And th e 
day he forgets this important fact and loses this humble attitude 
his downfall is at hand. 

Before dealing specifically with the Sutras in which Patanjali 
has given some information with regard to Siddhis it is necessary 
to point out certain general facts regarding his manner of treating 
the subject. 

The first thing we may note in this connection is that Patan- 
jali has not dealt with the subject of Siddhis in an exhaustive 
manner. He has merely taken up a few well-known Siddhis and 
hinted at the principles underlying their exercise by way of illus- 
tration. Neither are the Siddhis named or classified though the 



312 



section in (16) 



student of Togic literature will be able generally to identify the 
Siddhi dealt with in a particular Sutra and correlate it with those 
mentioned in other schools of Toga. It will also be seen that some 
of the Sutras given in the last portion of Section III can hardly be 
said to deal with Siddhis in the sense of occult powers. They deal 
rather with stages of Self-realization leading up to the last stage of 
complete Liberation or Kaivalya. So close is the connection between 
the stages of Self-realization and the powers which inhere in those 
stages that it becomes almost impossible to differentiate between 
the two, though Samyama may have to be resorted to for the sake 
of learning the technique of certain specific processes. 

The second important point we should impress upon our 
mind is that it is not the intention of Patanjali to give in these 
Sutras a clearrcut technique for the development of the Siddhis. He ;■.. 
merely hints in each Sutra at the principle or modus operandi of the 
mental process whereby the particular result can be attained. 
This can be utilized only by the advanced Togi who has already 
learnt the technique of Samyama to develop the particular Siddhi. 
Not only is the ordinary student unable to make any practical use 
of the hint given, but he is hardly in a position to understand its 
real significance. It is not enough merely to understand Samyama 
as, an intellectual concept. The successive mental processes under- 
lying it should be a matter of actual direct experience, as real as, 
for example, going from one room into another in one's own 
house. Let no one, therefore, be under the illusion that by care- 
fully studying the various Sutras and practising what is vaguely 
hinted at in them it is possible to develop the Siddhis. There is a 
price to pay and it is a very high price — a complete reorientation 
of one's life and its dedication to the Togic ideal, an adoption of 
the Togic discipline in its entirety and a fixed and unalterable 
determination to continue to strive, life after life, until the goal is 
reached. And in this ideal and the life which the Togi adopts the 
Siddhis, in the sense of occult powers, have Teally a very subordinate 
position and are generally not striven after directly. The main 
emphasis is on finding the Ultimate Truth through Self-realization 
and the Siddhis-are used merely as a means for gaining that end. 

It will be seen from what has been said above that the subject 
of Siddhis is not taboo among Togis and there is no need to adopt 



vibhOti pada 



313 



an attitude of morbid fear towards them as is sometimes advocated 
in certain schools of spiritual culture. There is no harm in studying 
the subject in an academic spirit with a view to acquire a better 
knowledge and comprehension of the Science of Toga. The danger 
begins when a hankering for developing these powers takes posses- 
sion of the mind of the neophyte and the possibility opens of his 
being side-tracked from the true Path of Toga. 

Even as regards this intellectual study the student should keep 
in mind his limitations and not expect too much from a careful 
and thorough study of the Sutras bearing on Siddhis. As has been 
pointed out repeatedly the mental processes which are involved 
in the development of Siddhis are not only internal and subjective 
but beyond the range of the ordinary mind with which we are 
familiar. Even Togic psychology cannot, therefore, explain every- 
thing. It can take the student only up to the border of the region 
with which he is familiar but cannot make him see through the 
veils which his lower mind has placed round his consciousness. 
All that can be hoped for, therefore, from the study of these Sutras 
is an intelligent grasp of the general principles underlying the 
different mental processes involved in developing various Siddhis. 
And in some cases even this may not be possible. 

The difficulty of understanding some of the Sutras is further 
increased by the fact that the exact significance of the words used 
in them has been obscured through the passage of time or through 
the efforts of all kinds of commentators to interpret them in a 
rather fantastic manner. Add to this the fact that Patanjali has 
in some cases used blinds or deliberately vague expressions to 
prevent over-ambitious or foolish aspirants from injuring them- 
selves by rushing into all kinds of dangerous practices and one 
can then see the difficulty in the way of acquiring a clear and 
satisfying grasp of the meaning of these Sutras dealing with the 
Siddhis. But even with all these limitations the student will find the 
subject a fascinating one and well worth the trouble which he 
takes in studying it. 

With this brief introduction regarding the treatment of Siddhis 
by Patanjali let us now turn to consider the different Sutras in 
which he has dealt with the individual Siddhis. The first of these 
Sutras which is under discussion deals with knowledge regarding the 



314 



SECTION UI (16, 17) 



past and future. This Sutra is sometimes interpreted as meaning 
that knowledge of the past and future (of anything) which arises by 
performing Samyama on the three kinds of transformations men- 
tioned in 111-13. With this, kind of interpretation it becomes 
necessary to assume that the future of everything is fixed and so 
predetermination rules the manifested Universe. If we substitute 
for * knowledge of the past and future ' ' knowledge of the nature 
of past and future ' the meaning becomes quite clear. How do 
we recognize the passage of time in which the future is constantly 
becoming the past ? By the transformations of properties, charac- 
teristics and states which are taking place in things around us. 
If these transformations came suddenly to a stop time would cease 
to flow. So by performing Sajnyama on the nature of these three 
transformations the Yogi realizes the true nature of time. 

It may be asked why the present has been left out of this 
classification of time into the past and future. The present as we all 
know has no reality. It is a mere concept for the ever-moving 
dividing line between the past and the future. In the incessant 
flow of time, as perceived by the change in properties, we can take 
a cross-section at any moment and that is the present, theoreti- 
cally. Actually, the present has become the past before we realize 
its presence and, therefore, ever eludes us. But, though it has no 
reality of -its Own it is a thing of tremendous significance because 
beneath this dividing line between the past and future is hidden 
the Eternal Now, the Reality which is beyond Time. 

Samyama on the three kinds of transformations makes the Yogi 
realize the nature of the ever-flowing current of time in the form 
of the past and the future. It does not enable him to transcend 
time and gain a glimpse of the Eternal which is hidden behind 
time. This is brought about by a different process given in 111-53. 

Sabdaxtha-pratyayanam itaretaradhyasat 
samkaras tat-pravibhaga-samyamat 
sarva-bhuta-ruta-jnanam. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



315 



3T55 word; sound 3T«r object; purpose SRIPTFTPT (of) idea; 
content of the mind $d^.d<HWll*Hd because of superimposition On 
each other H^T: mixture; confusion cRT (of) them ufa^i'i separa- 
tion; differentiation; resolution y±Hld by performing Samyama on 
?T#all w living beings W sounds sTR^T knowledge; comprehension. 

17. The sound, the meaning (behind it) and the 
idea (which is present in the mind at the time) are 
present together in a confused state. By performing 
Samyama (on the sound) they are resolved and there 
arises comprehension of the meaning of sounds uttered 
by any living being. 

If we are to understand how the Yogi can comprehend the 
meaning of the sounds uttered by any living being we have to 
consider the composite mental process which produces the sounds. 
Take, for example, a nightingale calling to its mate. We hear 
only the external sound but that sound is the final expression of a 
complex process in which two other elements are involved. One 
is the image of its mate present in the mind of the nightingale 
and the other is the desire or purpose (Artha), namely, to see the 
mate. Without both these elements the sounds could not be pro- 
duced. If anyone could enter the mind of the nightingale he 
would become aware of both these factors and gain immediately a 
comprehension of the meaning of the external sounds. Now, it 
has been shown already in explaining 1-42 that when several 
factors of this nature are present together in a complex mental 
process they can be resolved and separated from each other by 
performing Samyama on the factor which is outermost. The three 
factors together constitute a ' seed ' which can be split open and 
the meaning separated out as explained already. This will im- 
mediately enable the Yogi to comprehend the meaning of the 
sound uttered by the nightingale. Since the sounds uttered by all 
living beings are produced by the same kind of mental process 
referred to above, the Yogi can always come to know their meaning 
through Samyama. 



316 



SECTION m (17, 18) 



It is not necessary for the Yogi to sit down in meditation to 
know the meaning of such sounds. Once the technique of Samyama 
is mastered and he has learnt to resolve the complex process which 
results in the external sounds he can go through the process 
almost instantaneously and thus know the meaning on hearing 
the sounds. 

Samskara-saksatkaranat purva-jatijnanam. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



317 



tfFPTC impressions fl|SHId-+<u||d by observation; by direct 
perception ^ earlier; previous srrfr (of) birth ?TT^T knowledge. 

18. By direct perceptions of the impressions a 
knowledge of the previous birth. 

It is a part of the doctrine of reincarnation that all the 
experiences which we pass through in life produce impressions 
upon our vehicles and can thus be recovered from them by the 
application of proper methods. Experiments in hypnotism have 
shown conclusively that experiences which a person has passed 
through in physical life are indelibly impressed upon his brain 
even though he may not be able to remember them. This is 
proved by the fact that they can be recovered by putting him 
under hypnosis. In fact, by pushing hypnosis to deeper levels 
even impressions of previous lives can be revived. For example, 
a person who did not know even the rudiments of a language was 
found under hypnosis to talk fluently in that language and to 
show the characteristics of an entirely new personality. This 
shows that impressions connected with all the lives we have passed 
through are present somewhere within us and by diving suffi- 
ciently deep into our own consciousness it should be possible to 
revive the experiences which have produced those impressions, just 
as by playing a gramophone record it is possible to recover the 
sounds which produced the impressions on the record. 

These impressions of previous lives can be present only in 
some vehicle which has passed through all those lives and has not 



•ft 

1 



been newly formed with each incarnation like the physical body. 
This vehicle is called Karana Sarira or causal body and is referred 
to as Karmdsaya in II-l? because in it lie hidden all the ' seeds * of 
Karma which will fructify in the present and future lives. All 
Togis of a high order who can withdraw their consciousness into 
their causal vehicles and can thus come in direct contact with these 
impressions are thus able to obtain knowledge of previous lives of 
others and their own. The technique of this can be acquired 
through Samyama. 

Pratyayasya para-citta-jfianam. 

5R*rqW of the content of the mind qr another's f^T (of) 
mind 5TFPT knowledge. 

19. (By direct perception through Samyama) of 
the image occupying the mind, knowledge of the mind 
of others. 

The meaning of the word Pratyaya has been explained fully 
elsewhere. It is the content of the mind functioning through a 
particular vehicle. As the consciousness of an ordinary individual 
in the waking state is functioning through his mental body the 
Pratyaya in his case will be the mental image occupying his mind. 
Anyone who can see this mental image can gain knowledge of 
that mind. This can be done by performing Samyama and estab- 
lishing clairvoyant contact between the two vehicles. As this 
Sutra follows immediately after III- 18 the words Sdksatkarandt may 
be considered to be understood after Pratyayasya. 

Na ca tat salambanam tasyavisayl-bhu- 
tatvat. 



318 



SECTION III (20, 21) 



T not ^ and cRT that «wm' with support (STR^^T is that 
from which a thing hangs or by which it is supported) cRT its 
3jfaqin , Hd<Nld because of (its) not being the object (of Samyama). 

20. But not also of other mental factors which 
support the mental image for that is not the object 

(of Samyama) . 

It is obvious that by perceiving the mental image in the other 
mind the Yogi cannot automatically gain knowledge of the motive 
or purpose which is present behind the mental image. For this 
he will have to go deeper into the other mind. An example will 
make this clear. Suppose the Yogi sees the image of the sun in the 
other mind. This image may be produced by thinking of the sun 
by an astronomer who is interested in the sun as an astronomical 
object. It may be produced by an artist who is admiring the . 
beauty of the sun. It may be produced by a sun-worshipper who 
is worshipping the sun as an expression of Divine Life. The /; 
image in all these cases will be the same but the mental back- 
ground will be entirely different. The Sutra points out that by 
merely perceiving the mental image the Togi will not be able to 
obtain knowledge of the other factors which are present in the 
background and which are responsible for the production of the 
image. This merely serves to emphasize that the world of names 
and forms is different from, and is easier to reach than the world 
of motives, etc. which produces movements in the lower mind. 

Kaya-rupa-sarnyamat tad-grahya-sakti- 
stambhe caksuh-prakasasamprayoge 
'ntardhanam. 

*PPT the body ^T form; visibility ^prjTRT by performing Sam- 
yama on ?rt from it; thence ^rn*T receptive; apprehensible giPtd 



VIBHUTI PADA 



319 



(of) power; capacity ^TFR" on suspension =*ST: (of) the eye 5PPT9T 
with the light srhrW on there being no contact 3Rnjfa*T 
disappearance; invisibility. 

21. By performing Samyama on Rupa (one of the 
five Tanmdtras), on suspension of the receptive power, 
the contact between the eye (of the observer) and light 
(from the body) is broken and the body becomes 
invisible. 

The power of making oneself invisible is one of the well-known 
Siddhis which can be acquired by Yoga. How can the modus 
operandi of this Siddhi be explained? According to modern Science 
a body becomes visible when the light reflected from it strikes the 
eye of the perceiver. If this contact between the eye and the 
light can be prevented the body will become invisible. This can 
be done by performing Samyama on Rupa Tanmatra. The inter- 
relations between the Tattvas, Tanmdtras and the organs of sensa- 
tion and their correspondences are well known and form an 
integral part of the psychology upon which the Science of Yoga is 
based. All the visual phenomena are dependent upon the inter- 
play of the Tanmatra which is called Rupa, the Tattva which is 
called Tejas, and the organ of sensation which is called Caksuli 
(eye). By performing Samyama on the Rupa Tanmatra, the Yogi 
gains knowledge of the forces which connect the Tattva, the 
Tanmatra and the organ of sensation and can manipulate these 
forces as he likes. He can, therefore, prevent the light from his 
body reaching or affecting the eyes of the perceiver and thus make 
himself invisible. 

Etena sabdadyantardhanam uktam. 

q^t by this; by the above 3l«? sound 3TTfe and others; etc, 
airdH^H disappearance ^F{ has been said or described. 



320 



SECTION III (22, 23) 



22. From the above can be understood the dis- 
appearance of sound, etc. 

The principle referred to in the previous Sutra in relation to 
visual phenomena is also applicable to the other four organs of 
sensation. Thus by performing Samyama on the Sabda Tanmatra 
and gaining knowledge of the forces acting between the Tattva 
which is called Akdsa, the Tanmatra which is called Sabda and the 
organ of sensation which is called Srotra (the ear) the Yogi can 
control phenomena connected with sound. If the vibrations 
which affect any sense-organ and. produce the corresponding sensa- 
tions can be cut off the source of those vibrations naturally becomes 
imperceptible as far as that sense-organ is concerned. This Sutra 
is omitted in some of the texts, obviously because what is pointed 
out in it can be inferred from the previous Sutra. 

Sopakramam nirupakramam ca karmz 
tat-samyamad aparanta-jnanam 
aristebhyo va. 

*ftM^M energetically operative; active fa^M^M slowly working; 
without intensive activity; dormant ^ and 3HT (sum of person's) 
actions (viewed as determining his future) 3cT them SPrtTRT 
by performing Samyama on 3H<M of death ; of the final end siiih 
knowledge ^ft&i'ui : from omens or portents 3T or. 

23. Karma is of two kinds: active and dormant; 
by performing Samyama on them (is gained) knowledge 
of the time of death ; also by (performing Samyama on) 
portents. 

Those who are familiar with the doctrine of Karma will recall 
that Karma is of three kinds: Prarabdha, Samcita and Kriyamdna. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



321 



Samcita Karma is the total stock of accumulated Karma, generated by 
an individual during the present and previous lives, which has 
still to be worked out. Prarabdha is that portion of this total stock 
which has to be worked out in the present incarnation. This 
portion is selected out of the total stock at the beginning of each 
incarnation according to the opportunities provided by the 
circumstances of the incarnation for the working out of particular 
types of Karma. Kriyamdna is the Karma which is generated from 
day to day. Some of this is exhausted immediately while the 
remainder goes to swell the accumulated stock. 

It will be clear from what has been said above that Prarabdha 
Karma is distinguishable from Samcita Karma by its potentiality for 
finding expression in the present life and it should be possible for 
anyone who can obtain a bird's-eye view of the whole landscape 
of Samskdras to separate this active Prarabdha Karma from the 
dormant Samcita Karma. If this can be done then the determination 
of the time of death should be quite easy. It will be the moment 
when all the Karmas included in Prarabdha are due to be exhausted. 
This is what Samyama on the Samcita and Prarabdha Karma brings 
about. But this Siddhi implies the power to raise the conscious- 
ness to the plane of the Karana S~arira. It is this body which is the 
repository of all Kdrmic Samskdras and it is only when the Yogi can 
function consciously in this body that he can investigate success- 
fully the Kdrmic potentialities of his own life or those of others. 

Another method by which the Yogi can determine the time 
of death is by observing a certain omen and performing Samyama 
on that. The coming of the scientific age has relegated all such 
things as omens or portents to the realm of superstitions, and there 
is no doubt that prior to the advance of Science the subject of 
portents had become surrounded by the grossest superstitions and 
fancies of the ignorant masses. But, it must be understood that 
there is nothing inherently absurd in obtaining an indication of 
future events which are imminent by means of certain signs or 
symptoms that may be available, because coming events do some- 
times cast their shadows before they actually take place. 

When a doctor is called in to see a patient in the last stages 
of a critical illness he can, by simply placing his hand on the pulse 
of the patient, sometimes say with certainty that the patient is 
21 



322 



SECTION in (23, 24) 



about to pass away. The pulse gives an indication of his general 
condition and on the basis of that he can, almost with certainty, 
foretell the death of the patient. His prediction is not the result 
of guess work but of drawing an inference from certain observa- 
tions he has made. Every man cannot foretell such an event. It 
requires medical knowledge and experience. A real portent is 
such a significant sign which gives an indication of the coming 
event. In itself it may be trivial and have no rational connection 
with the thing predicted but to the man who can peer into the 
inner side of natural phenomena it may provide a definite indi- 
cation of what is to come in the future. But it is obvious that 
only those whose inner eyes have been opened and who are able 
to trace effects to their causes by means of Samyama can recognize 
such an omen and interpret it correctly. 

Maitry-adisu balani. 

Wt-3rrf^T on friendliness, etc. «HlPl strengths or powers. 

24. (By performing Samyama) on friendliness, etc. 
(comes) strength (of the quality). 

It is a well-known law of psychology that if we think of any 
quality persistently that quality tends to become more and more a 
part of our character. This effect is heightened by meditation in 
which the concentration of mind is far more intense than in 
ordinary thinking. The effect is increased tremendously in 
Samadhi for the following reason. When the Togi performs Samyama 
on any quality his mind becomes one with that quality for the 
time being as has been explained in 1-41. The positive qualities 
like courage, compassion etc. are not vague nebulous things as 
they appear to the lower mind but real, living, dynamic principles of 
unlimited power which cannot manifest fully in the lower worlds 
for lack of adequate instruments. A principle or quality merely 
sheds its radiance feebly, as it were, while we merely think of the 



V1BHUT1 PADA 



323 



quality, the radiance becoming more and more bright as the 
thinking becomes deeper and more persistent and the mind gets 
more and more attuned to the quality. But when Samyama is per- 
formed on the particular quality and it fuses with the mind it can 
manifest through it to an unlimited extent. Even when this 
condition of being en rapport with the quality ends on the cessation 
of Samyama the effect of this direct contact is to make a permanent 
impression on the mind and to increase enormously its power to 
manifest that quality under normal conditions. And with repeated 
Samyama the mind gets so attuned to the quality that its perfect 
expression in normal life becomes easy and natural. 

That is how the advanced Togi can make himself the very 
embodiment of the powers of love, sympathy, courage, patience, 
etc. and can express them to an extent which seems wonderful to 
the neophyte who is still struggling to acquire those qualities. 
Samyama, therefore, provides the Togi with the most efficient 
technique of character-building. 

^. sp^j ^for^rnftft- i 

Balesu hasti-baladini. 



«H<£ by Samyama on strengths; powers (pi.) sjfer-^TRtft' 
strength of elephant, etc. 

25. (By performing Samyama) on the strengths 
(of animals) the strength of an elephant, etc. 

What has been said above with regard to qualities which 
may be called human traits of character applies equally to powers 
which are special characteristics of animals. Thus, if the Togi 
performs Samyama on strength which is possessed in different 
degrees by different animals he can acquire strength, even that of 
an elephant. Of course, the elephant does not indicate the limit 
of the strength which can be acquired, this animal being men- 
tioned merely because it is supposed to be the strongest animal 
known to us. What that limit is it is difficult to say. 



324 



SECTION m (25, 26) 



What we should note, however, is that all these qualities or 
powers like strength, speed, etc. which involve generally physical 
forces are not mere abstractions but living principles or Tattvas 
having their source in the consciousness of the Logos. The Yogi 
who gains direct contact with these principles is therefore in touch 
with a source whose potentialities are unlimited as far as we are 
concerned. 

\\. M<lTSJM~l+rA{|uid ^H oiA =t Hid fa U £> fcdtf I - 

■\ 
Pravrtty-aloka-nyasat suksma-vyavahita- 
viprakrsta-jnanam. 

nqRl higher sensuous activity; superphysical faculty 3uviW 
light wjl^ld by directing or projecting 3J$rT (of) the small; fine; 
subtle o^f^ra the hidden; the obscure Pti|*M the distant sIM^ 
knowledge. 

26. Knowledge of the small, the hidden or the 
distant by directing the light of superphysical faculty. 

That interpenetrating the physical plane there are several 
supers-physical planes of progressively increasing subtlety is a well- 
known doctrine of Occult philosophy. Patanjali has not definitely 
mentioned and classified the different planes but their existence is 
implicit in his doctrines of different levels of consciousness (1-17) 
and the stages of the Gunas (11-19). His reference to higher 
sensuous activity or superphysical faculties in the Sutra also shows 
that he took for granted the existence of the superphysical worlds, 
and the exercise of faculties pertaining to them. Another reason, 
perhaps, why the different planes of existence are not mentioned 
by him specifically is that such a division of the material side of 
the Universe is not necessary for the purpose of Toga. Toga as a 
practical Science is concerned mainly with the raising of human 
consciousness into progressively higher levels of existence and 
since all the planes really form one heterogeneous mass of particles 
of matter, they may, for the sake of convenience, be taken as one. 



VIBHUTI PAX>A 



325 



Subtlety, obscurity and remoteness to which reference is 
made in this Sutra are all due to the limitations of the sense-organs. 
These limitations are sought to be overcome by Science by enlarg- 
ing the scope of the sense-organs through the use of highly refined 
physical instruments. Thus enormous help is given to the eyes 
in seeing what is distant by the use of a telescope, in seeing what is 
small by the use of a microscope and in seeing what is hidden by 
the use of an X-ray apparatus. But these instrumental aids afforded 
to our physical sense-organs, though wonderful in some ways, suffer 
from enormous limitations of various kinds. In the first place, their 
sphere of observation, however enlarged it may be, is confined 
within the physical world. All the superphysical worlds by their 
very nature will always remain hidden from the most sensitive 
physical instruments that may be devised. And since the physical 
world is merely the outermost shell of the manifested. Universe our 
knowledge of this Universe is bound to remain fragmentary and 
extremely partial. In the second place, it is never possible to 
reach the final truth with regard to fundamental scientific ques- 
tions in this way. Wonderful though our knowledge is with 
regard to matter and energy we should not forget that much of 
this knowledge is inferential and therefore subject to doubt and 
error. The rapid supersession of different theories, one after 
another, which has marked the advance of Science in the fields of 
chemistry and physics has created so much confusion and uncer- 
tainty with regard to the fundamental questions concerning the 
nature of the manifested Universe that the scientist does not seem 
to be sure about anything now except the empirical facts which 
he has obtained and utilized in such a marvellous manner. This 
is inevitable as long as we continue to investigate, exclusively by 
physical instruments and mathematical analysis, a Universe whose 
foundations lie in the realms of mind and consciousness. 

Now, the Togic method is entirely different. It discards com- 
pletely all external aids and relies on the unfoldment of inner 
organs of perception. These organs are present irt a more or less 
perfect state of development in all evolved human beings and 
require only to be put to use by proper training through Togic 
methods. The unfoldment of these organs, corresponding to all 
levels of consciousness and subtlety of matter, step by step, opens 



326 



SECTION III (26, 27) 



up naturally all the subtle realms of matter to the Yogi right up 
to the last stage where matter disappears into consciousness. And 
incidentally, it provides him with the means of investigating the 
phenomena even of the physical world and manipulating its forces 
far more simply and effectively than a scientist can do, as the 
nature of many Siddhis clearly shows. It is true that the Togic 
method is individual, incapable of public demonstration and 
requires prolonged and rigorous self-discipline. But those who 
can see the illusions of life and are determined to know the Truth 
are bound to prefer it when they realize that the scientific method 
can give them only the superficial knowledge of the physical plane, 
and does not hold out any hope of freeing them from the limita- 
tions of life. 

The powers referred to in the Sutra are decidedly of a lower 
order than the more important and real Siddhis because there are 
a few people scattered throughout the world who can undoubtedly 
exercise such powers in a limited way. Psychic powers like clair- 
voyance or clairaudience are so common now that their possibility 
is no longer denied by the majority of thoughtful people even 
though they may not have found recognition in strictly scientific 
circles. But when they are exhibited by people in the ordinary 
way either from pecuniary considerations or to satisfy the curiosity 
of people they will be found to be developed not by strictly Togic 
methods but by other methods to which Patanjali has made 
reference in IV- 1 . 

Bhuvana-jfianam surye samyamat. 

*P^T (of) the Solar system WUT knowledge g^r on the Sun 
HWRT by performing Samyama on. 

27. Knowledge of the Solar system by performing 
Samyama on the Sun. 

This Sutra and the next two deal with the method of acquiring 
knowledge regarding the heavenly bodies. There are three basic 



VIBHUTI PADA 



327 



questions involved in this knowledge. The first is the structure of 
a Solar system which is the fundamental unit in the whole Cosmos. 
The second is the arrangement of the stars in different kinds of 
groups such as galaxies, etc. The third is the law which underlies 
their movements. Knowledge with regard to these primary 
questions is obtained by performing Samyama on three different 
objects in the sky as indicated in these Sutras. To understand how 
this is possible the student should recall what has been said in 
connection with 1-42 concerning the different principles underlying 
Samyama for different purposes. 

The Sutra under discussion deals with the method of acquiring 
knowledge concerning the structure of a Solar system. This knowl- 
edge includes not only the physical aspect which has been studied 
so thoroughly by modern astronomers but also the superphysical 
aspects which are hidden from our view but are far more interest- 
ing and significant. A general knowledge regarding our Sun as 
obtained by scientific methods will convince anyone that the Sun 
is in some mysterious manner the very heart and soul of the Solar 
system. Occult investigations based on Togic methods have shown 
that this appearance of alJ life in the Solar system being centred in 
the Sun has a deeper significance and is due to the fact that the 
Solar system is a vehicle for the expression of the Jife and 
consciousness of a Mighty Being whom we call as Isvara or 
a Solar Logos. This life and consciousness expresses itself at 
different levels through the different planes of the Solar system 
which interpenetrate one another and form one integrated 
whole. 

Since the different planes of the Solar system are organically 
related to one another and the physical Sun is the centre of this 
complex organism, it is easy to see how Samyama on the Sun will 
unfold in the mind of the Yogi the whole pattern of the Solar 
system and give him a comprehensive knowledge not only with 
regard to the structure of our Solar system but all Solar systems 
which constitute the Cosmos. For, these Solar systems though 
separated from one another by tremendous distances are not really 
independent of one another. They are rooted in the One Ultimate 
Reality, derive their life from one ' Common Source ' and are 
modelled on one pattern. 



328 



SECTION in (28) 



Gandre tara^vyuha-jnanam. 

^S (by performing Samyama on) the moon cflTT (of) star 
sq^ organization; interlinking arrangement ?1MH knowledge. 

2.8. (By performing Samyama) on the moon knowl- 
edge concerning the arrangement of stars. 

This SUtra provides an illustration of the principle that by 
performing Sartiyama on an external phenomenon it is possible to 
obtain knowledge of the basic law or principle upon which that 
phenomenon is based. A study of the sky by astronomical methods 
has not only enlarged our horizon and given us knowledge of stars, 
galaxies, and universes beyond human kenlbut it has also enabled 
us to gain a glimpse into the relations which exist between these 
different groups of stars. With every increase in the power of 
magnification of telescopes new galaxies and universes come within 
the range of observation and prove the infinite nature of the 
Cosmos. All these heavenly bodies which appear to be scattered 
in the sky in a haphazard manner have been found by astronomers 
to be grouped in different ways, these groups being related to one 
another in a definite/manner. Thus the satellites are grouped and 
move round a planet, the planets are grouped and move round a 
central sun, the suns which we see as stars form part of a much 
larger group called a galaxy and the galaxies are grouped together 
in a universe. The /distances and times involved in these groupings 
and movements of stars are so stupendous as compared with the 
periods during which the observations have been made that no 
clear and over-all picture of the whole Cosmos can be obtained by 
purely physical methods, though anyone who has studied the 
subject with an open mind cannot fail to see- that there is a Grand 
Design at the basis of the astronomical phenomena. 

How can the Togi obtain knowledge of this design? By per- 
forming Samyama on an astronomical phenomenon which is typical 
of the different groupings and movements. The movement of 



SADHANA PADA 



329 



the moon round the earth is such a phenomenon on the smallest 
scale. It embodies the essential characteristics of all the groupings 
and movements and it is easy to see how Samyama on it will unfold 
in the mind of the Togi the essential nature of the Cosmic Design. 



Dhruve tad-gati-jnanam. 

£pT (by performing Samyama) on the pole-star 5RT-*T%: (of) 
their movement ?1MH knowledge. 

29. (By performing Samyama) on the pole-star 
knowledge of their movements. 

What has been said above with regard to the general law 
which regulates the spatial relationships of the heavenly bodies 
applies equally to the law which regulates their relative move- 
ments. It is well known that motion is a purely relative thing 
and it is not possible to define or determine absolute motion. We 
can measure motion only in relation to another object which is 
fixed. This is the law upon which all other laws of motion are 
based. Now, there is only one star in the sky whose position is 
relatively fixed and which is, therefore, considered as a symbol of 
fixity. This is called Dhruva or pole-star. This star may, therefore, 
be taken to be a symbol of the fundamental law of motion referred 
to above. By Samyama on Dhruva is, therefore, meant not Samyama 
on the physical star which bears that name but on the law of 
motion of which it is a symbol. 

How Samyama on this fundamental law will enable the Togi 
to acquire knowledge of all the laws of motion governing the 
movements of the heavenly bodies will be clear if we remember 
that the different laws of motion are inter-related and by perform- 
ing Samyama on the basic law it is possible to acquire knowledge 
of all. Those who are familiar with the philosophy of modern 
Science will recall how Science is always aiming to discover a 
simple and fundamental law which underlies a number of diverse 



330 



SECTION III (29, 30) 



laws working in a particular sphere. Such a search is based on 
the intuitive perception of the fundamental unity underlying 
manifestation. All laws of Nature operating in different spheres 
and apparently quite unrelated are really derived from the pro- 
gressive differentiation of a single comprehensive Law which 
expresses the working of Nature in its entirety. That is why it is 
possible to integrate minor laws into more comprehensive laws 
progressively and by performing Samyama on one aspect of a law 
to acquire knowledge of all the other aspects. 

Nabhi-cakre kaya-vyuha-jnanam. 

TTTftr*r% (by performing Samyama) on the navel-disc (centre) 
tppi the body sq - ^ arrangement; organization fliiH. knowledge. 

30. (By performing Samyama) on the navel centre 
knowledge of the organization of the body. 

The physical body is a wonderful living organism which 
serves in a remarkable manner as an instrument of consciousness 
on the physical plane. It is true that a part of the physical body 
and the most important part, is invisible and outside the purview 
of modern scientific methods The whole system of Pranic distri- 
bution, for example, which works through the Pranamaya Kosa and 
supplies vitality to the Annamaya Kosa is unknown to Science. But 
even what can be investigated by scientific methods shows that the 
various activities of the body have been organized in the most 
scientific manner and seem to be guided by the highest intelligence. 
A detailed study of this organization of the body shows also 
that it is organized on a set pattern and, therefore, all human bodies 
are structurally and functionally alike in essentials. The circu- 
latory system, the nervous system, the lymphatic system, the 
glandular system and other systems work in the same way in all 
human bodies though they have also remarkable powers of adapt- 
ability. The reason for this similar behaviour of all human bodies 



VTBHUTI PADA 



331 



is, of course, the presence of an archetype in the Universal Mind 
to which all bodies conform. That is why, in the case of billions 
and billions of human beings who are born under the most varied 
conditions, the same pattern in the outer form of the body and in 
its inner working is repeated with remarkable fidelity. 

Anyone who can mentally contact this archetype of the 
human bodv will obtain full knowledge of the machinery of the 
physical body. This can be done by performing Samyama on the 
navel Cakra because this Cakra controls the sympathetic nervous 
system working in the body. But, of course, it is the archetype 
of the body which is the object of knowledge in performing 
Samyama and the navel Cakra is merely the gateway leading to that 
archetype. The navel centre is not the solar plexus but the 
centre of Cakra in the Pranamaya Kosa which is connected with the 
solar plexus. 

Kantha-kupe ksut-pipasa-nivrttih. 

+<J4«t>^ (by performing Samyama) on the gullet ( c throat- 
well ') sra; (of) hunger fPTTOT thirst ftpffa": cessation. 

31. (By performing Samyama) on the gullet the 
cessation of hunger and thirst. 

It is well known that sensations of hunger and thirst and 
similar other phenomena depend upon the secretions of glands 
situated in various parts of the body. A knowledge of the working 
of these glands and the capacity to regulate their secretions will, 
naturally, give power to the Togi to control the sensations. There 
are several glands situated in and around the throat, and Samyama 
on the navel Cakra having revealed the presence of the gland 
which controls hunger and thirst, will enable the Togi to make 
these sensations voluntary. 

It may, however, be mentioned that it is really Prana which 
controls secretions of glands and since Prana is amenable to thought, 
once knowledge of the working of glands is acquired the Togi can 



332 



SECTION III (31, 32) 



control all the physiological actions in the body, even the move- 
ments of the heart and lungs. What a doctor tries to bring 
about by the action of drugs the Togi can bring about by the control 
and regulation of Prdnic currents in the body. The glands in- 
volved in these physiological actions have not been specified by 
Patanjali, obviously, to prevent foolish people from dabbling in 
these matters and injuring themselves. 



3^. ++HI«a-MI F^TR" I 

Kurma-nadyam sthairyam. 

+HHI^-MF (by performing Samyama) on the Kurma-nadi, i.e. 
the nerve which is the vehicle of the Prdna called Kurma *-34h 
steadiness; immovability. 

32. (By performing Samyama) on the Kurma-nadi 
steadiness. 

Prdna is of many kinds, each kind having special functions in 
the body and a special Jfddi as its vehicle. Kurma is one of the 
well-known varieties of Prdna and the particular nerve which 
serves as its vehicle is called Kurma-nadi. This variety of Prdna 
has obviously something to do with the motions of the body for by 
controlling it the Togi acquires the power to make his body 
motionless. This control can be acquired, as usual, by performing 
Samyama on the Nadi which is its vehicle. 

All the physiological devices working in the physical body are 
meant to carry on their normal activities in an involuntary manner. 
But since each device is really the vehicle of a principle or Tattva 
it is possible by gaining voluntary control over its function to 
express that principle to any extent desired. It is this kind of 
voluntary control over the function of the Kurma-nadi which 
enables the Togi to perform feats of strength which appear mira- 
culous to an ordinary person. But, of course, no real Togi will 
make a demonstration of this kind. 



VTBHUTI PADA 333 

Murdha-jyotisi siddha-darsanam. 

iry-jiflfdfa (by performing Samyama) on the light under the 
crown of the head ftn»- (of) perfected Beings; Adepts <!<H*j[ 
vision of. 

33. (By performing Samyama on) the light under 
the crown of the head vision of perfected Beings. 

Since the Togic philosophy is based upon the immortality of 
the human soul and its perfection through evolution, the existence 
of those who have perfected themselves and are living in a state of 
the highest Enlightenment is taken for granted. Such Beings are 
called Siddhas. 

These perfected Beings are above the necessity of reincarna- 
tion because they have already learnt all the lessons which embodied 
life has to teach and have completed the cycle of human evolution. 
They live on the spiritual planes of the Solar system and even 
when they retain bodies on the lower planes for helping humanity 
in its evolution their consciousness remains really centred in the 
higher planes. To come in contact with these Beings one has to 
rise to the plane on which their consciousness normally functions. 
Merely coming in physical contact with them in some way is not 
of much use because unless a person is attuned to their higher 
life he cannot derive real benefit from his contact with them. 

How can one come into touch with these perfected Beings in 
the proper way? By performing Samyama on the light under the 
crown of the head. There is a small rudimentary organ in the brain 
which is called the pituitary body. Besides its other physiological 
functions known to medical science it has the important function 
of establishing contact with the spiritual planes on which the 
consciousness of the Siddha functions. When it is made active by 
meditation it serves as a bridge between the higher and lower 
consciousness and enables the light of the higher worlds to pene- 
trate into the brain. It is only then that the Siddhis really become 



334 



SECTION m (33, 34) 



accessible to the Togi because he can rise to their plane and hold 
communion with them. But it is not by merely concentrating on 
this physical organ that this kind of communication can be estab- 
lished. It is by performing Samyama on the light for which the 
organ can serve as the physical vehicle. 

^v. siiRwi&i *#r; I 

Pratibhad va sarvam. 
sriRnfTTcT from intuitive (knowledge) 3T or ^PHf everything; all. 
34. (Knowledge of) everything from intuition. 

It is well known that all the Siddhis can be acquired by 
methods other than those outlined in the Toga-Sutras so. far. For 
example, a Bhakta who follows the path of love comes in possession 
of many Siddhis though he has done nothing to develop them 
deliberately. This shows that there is a state of spiritual consci- 
ousness in which all these powers are inherent and, therefore, 
anyone who attains to this state by whatever method acquires 
the Siddhis automatically. The Bhakta attains to this state by 
union with the Beloved through love, Jriani through discrimina- 
tion. Patafijali has given in the next two Sutras the method of 
developing this state of consciousness by the strictly Togic method. 

This state of consciousness in which Siddhis of all kinds are 
inherent also confers the power to perceive truth directly without 
the help of any instruments. The latter faculty which is called 
Pratibha here has really no equivalent in English. The word which 
comes nearest to it in meaning is intuition. But this word intuition 
as used in Western psychology has a rather vague and general 
sense of apprehension of truth by the mind without reasoning. 
The emphasis is on the absence of reasoning and not on the tran- 
scendent nature of what is apprehended. It is true that some 
Western philosophers have used the word intuition in a more 
specific sense which comes nearer to that of Pratibha but that is not 
the generally accepted meaning of the term. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



335 



The word Pratibha as used in the Toga-Sutras stands for that 
transcendent spiritual faculty of perception which can dispense 
with the use of not only the sense-organs but also the mind. It 
can perceive everything directly mirrored, as it were, in consci- 
ousness itself and not through the instrumentality of the senses or 
the mind. Intuition, on the other hand, is at its best a vague and 
weak reflection of Pratibha and may be called an echo or lower 
reverberation of Pratibha in the realm of the mind. It lacks the 
directness and definiteness of perception implied in Pratibha. 

That there must be a faculty of non-instrumental perception 
is clear from the fact that Isvafa is conscious of everything every- 
where without the use of the sense-organs or the mind. If omni- 
science is a fact then non-instrumental perception must also be a 
fact and Pratibha is only the expression of this kind of perception 
through an individual in a limited manner. This is also the 
faculty which perfected Beings who have attained Kaivalya use in 
maintaining their contact with the lower worlds which they have 
transcended. Perception through the sense-organs should, there- 
fore, be considered merely as a stage in the unfoldment of consci- 
ousness. After the higher consciousness has become unfolded the 
use of these organs becomes mostly unnecessary and is resorted to 
only for certain specific purposes. In evolutionary progress it is 
found frequently that a particular mechanism representing a lower 
stage is used only in unfolding a higher stage and disappears after 
it has achieved its purpose. 

Hrdaye citta-samvit. 

^q - (by performing Samyama) on the heart farmPld aware- 
ness of the mind (consciousness which manifests in association 
with matter as mind). 



35. (By performing Samyama) on the heart, aware- 
ness of the nature of the mind. 



336 



SECTION III (35, 36) 



In this Sutra and the next the method of unfolding intuitional 
consciousness is given. As the intuitional consciousness transcends 
mental consciousness the first step, naturally, is to acquire true 
knowledge concerning the nature of the mind and how it modifies 
pure consciousness, i.e. consciousness of the Purusa. This knowledge 
is gained by performing Samyama on the heart. What is meant 
by the heart? 

On the form side the Jivatma is constituted of a set of con- 
centric vehicles composed of matter of different degrees of subtle- 
ty just as the Solar Logos on the form side is constituted of a set 
of concentric planes irradiated by His consciousness. The former 
is called Pindanda, the auric egg, while the latter is called a 
Brahmanda, the Brdhmic egg, the two being related to each other as 
microcosm and macrocosm and having a common centre. Just as 
the sun both in its physical and super-physical aspects forms the 
heart of the Solar system from which radiate all the energies which 
are needed in the Solar system, in the same way, the common 
centre of all the vehicles of the Jivatma which energizes them is 
referred to in occult and mystic literature as the heart. It is prob- 
ably so called firstly, because of its proximity to the physical 
heart and secondly, because of its analogous function. The gateway 
to the mystic heart is the Cakra known as Anahata and it is Samyama 
on this which really enables the Yogi to know the nature of the 
mind principle which functions through the different vehicles at 
different levels. 

As Citta is merely the product of the interaction of conscious- 
ness and matter (1-2) it should be easy to see why the common 
centre of all the vehicles through which consciousness functions 
should also be the seat of Citta. The senses are merely the outposts 
of Citta and should be considered as part of Citta. 

Satitva-purusayor atyant&sarnklrnayoh pra- 
tyayaviseso bhogah pararthat svartha- 
samyamat purusa-jnanam. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



337 



^Tr^^wffr: of Sattva (one of the three Gunas) representing 
refined Buddhi and Purusa 3k*W extremely arcFptwT: (of) the 
immiscible; distinctive n^nn (of) awareness 3rf^?PT: non-distinc- 
tion ?ftT: (is) experience mj^Td apart from another's (interest) 
?^PT Self-interest fl^HId by performing Samyama on JW (of) Purusa 
stun knowledge. 

36. Experience is the result of inability to dis- 
tinguish between the Purusa and the Sattva though they 
are absolutely distinct. Knowledge of the Purusa results 
from Samyama on the Self-interest (of the Purusa) apart 
from another's interest (of Prakrti). 

This is one of those Sutras which many students find it difficult 
to understand. This is due to the fact that it involves some 
fundamental doctrines of Samkhya philosophy about which our 
ideas are not quite clear. If we clarify these ideas first the mean- 
ing of the Sutra will become much clearer. Although the Toga- 
sutras are considered generally to be based entirely on Samkhya 
they are best understood on the basis of both Samkhya and Vedantic 
doctrines and there is really no justification for the arbitrary 
exclusion of Vedantic doctrines in discussing the problems of 
higher Toga. 

The first idea which we should try to grasp is that the Purusa 
is a Centre in the Ultimate Reality {Brahman) and transcends 
manifestation and its limitations. His descent into manifestation 
through association with Prakrti does not alter his transcendental 
nature although it modifies Prakrti through which his triple nature 
denoted by Sat-Cit-Ananda expresses itself. This triple nature is 
reflected in the three Gunas, the correspondences between the 
aspects of consciousness and Gunas being represented by the 
following diagram: 



22 



338 



SECTION III (36) 
AN^NDA 




SATTVA 



Fig. 10 
It will be seen from the above diagram that the principle of 
cognition or awareness which is included in Ananda of the Vedantic 
terminology corresponds to the Sattva Guna. It is because the 
object of Toga is Self-realization or obtaining awareness of one's 
true nature (1-3) that Sattva Guna plays such an important part in 
the exposition of its doctrines. 

When the consciousness of the Purusa manifests in the realm 
of Prakrti it appears as awareness of the Not-Self and this aware- 
ness which expresses itself through the action of Sattva Guna is 
called Buddhi. Some confusion is always caused by the use of the 
same word — consciousness- — both for the transcendent consciousness 
of the Purusa which is above the realm of Prakrti and its reflection as 
awareness within, the realm of Prakrti. When we use the word 
consciousness in its ordinary sense we always mean the latter, but 
there is really ho word in English corresponding to the trans- 
cendent consciousness of the Purusa of which the consciousness of 
modern psychology is a partial and limited manifestation. The 
word used in Samskrta for pure transcendent consciousness of 
Purusa is Giti-Sakti (IV-34) or more generally Caitanyam while the 
conditioned, consciousness is called generally Samvit (111-35). 

When the pure consciousness of the Purufa is associated with 
Prakrti it becomes increasingly conditioned as it descends, plane by 
plane, these different degrees of conditioning being represented 
by the four stages of the Gunas (11-19). It should, however, be 
borne in mind that Samkhya is based upon the absolute transcend- 
ence of the Purusa. According to it the Purusa does not descend 
into Prakrti but is merely associated with Prakrti in an undefined 
manner. The mere propinquity oT Purusa brings about changes in 



VIBHUTI PADA 



339 



Prakrti, one of these changes being the development of conditioned 
consciousness. It is because the Purusa is always quite separate 
and distinct from Prakrti that all phenomena of consciousness or 
awareness are considered purely Prakrtic, based on Sattva Guna. 
For all practical purposes the word Sattva as used in the present 
context may bs taken as the principle of awareness expressing 
through the faculty of Buddhi. The Purusa remains quite separate 
from it though his presence stimulates the awareness through 
Buddhi. This awareness becomes more and more vivid and 
simulates more perfectly the consciousness of the Purusa as it is 
expressed through the increasingly subtler stages of the Gunas but 
there can be nothing common between the two, for the former is a 
pure product of Prakrti while the latter transcends Prakrti al- 
together. The two are quite distinct. This is what is meant by 
the phrase Atyantdsamkirnayoh. 

The second idea which has to be grasped in this Sutra 
concerns the nature of experience. Since the Purusa transcends 
Prakrti altogether and experience is always in the realm of Prakrti, 
the Purusa cannot be the experiencer. Experience results when, 
through Avidya, there is non-distinction or identification between 
the Purusa and the conditioned consciousness which is called Sattva 
in this Sutra. Even in ordinary life we find that the more we 
identify ourselves with our mind and its contents and allow our- 
selves to get lost in them the greater is the zest of life, while 
detachment takes the zest out of experiences and converts them 
into mere awareness. The greater the detachment or Vairagya 
through discrimination the more perfect is the transformation of 
Bhoga or experience into mere awareness. AJivanmukta is as much 
conscious when functioning through a vehicle as the ordinary man 
but since the element of identification is absent there is no Bhoga 
or tasteful experience. This gradual disengagement of pure con- 
sciousness from the Pratyaya which is produced by contact with a 
vehicle is brought about by Viveka and Vairagya and when com- 
pleted leads to Kaivalya. 

Is then Kaivalya a state completely devoid of happiness ? Is 
it a perfectly colourless existence in which there is nothing to 
compensate for the joys and happiness which we sometimes feel in 
ordinary life? This is a misconception which frequently troubles 



340 



SECTION III (36) 



those who have studied these questions superficially and is fre- 
quently the cause of the repulsion which they sometimes feel 
towards the Togic ideal of Liberation. To remove this miscon- 
ception we have merely to ask what is the source of the illusory 
happiness which we feel in the joyful experiences of our ordinary 
life and the blissful experiences of the higher life. Of course, the 
Self whose very nature is bliss. The outer experience is merely 
an exciting cause. It is the response from within — the source of 
bliss — which produces the faint reverberations which we feel as 
joys and pleasures of the lower life. In giving up the joys and 
pleasures of the lower life we are merely giving up the indirect, 
feeble and uncertain method of obtaining bliss for the direct 
method. We give up our hold on the shadow so that we may 
grasp the substance. . Instead of trying vainly to gain blissful 
experience we become Bliss itself. 

As the pure consciousness of the Purusa is really quite separate 
and yet appears indistinguishable from awareness in the realm 
of Prakrti, the question arises how to separate the two in order to 
gain knowledge of the Purusa. The method prescribed in this 
Sutra is Satnyama on the distinction between the purpose hidden 
behind the Pratyaya and the purpose of the Purusa himself. The 
Pratyaya is for another. It is a product of Prakrti which according 
to Sdtnkkya acts only and always for the Purusa. The consciousness 
of the Purusa is for the Purusa himself. It has no ulterior motive 
or purpose, the Purusa being eternal, changeless and Self-sufficient. 
This distinction, subtle though it is, can be made the object of 
Satnyama and it is possible in this manner to resolve the apparently 
homogeneous Pratyaya into its two components, the Sattva Guna in 
which the consciousness of the Purusa is reflected and the consci- 
ousness of the Purusa himself. The problem is not unlike that of 
distinguishing between a source of light and its reflection in a 
mirror. Just as there can be several methods of distinguishing 
between the real object and its reflection so there can be several 
methods of distinguishing between the reflection of the Purusa in 
Sattva and the Purusa himself. The method proposed is one of 
them and leads to the knowledge of the Purusa himself as distin- 
guished from his reflection in Sattva. When this knowledge is 
obtained the Yogi is in a position to exercise non-instrumental 



VIBHUTI PADA 



341 



perception hinted at in 111-34. As the Purusa is above the limita- 
tions of Prakrti his perception must also be above the limitations 
of the mind and the sense-organs. 

Tatah pratibha-sravana-ved'anadarsasvada- 
varta jayante. 

^T: thence; from it srrRnr intuitional STPTT auditory ^T 
tactile cHK!j| visual 3||t4K gustatory ^Trrf olfactory (knowledge) 
3TTTRT are born; are produced. 

37. Thence are produced intuitional hearing, 
touch, sight, taste and smell. 

Since intuitional perception transcends the mind, and the 
sense-organs are really the outposts of the mind, it should not be 
difficult to understand in a general way how the sense-organs are 
done away with in the exercise of intuitional perception. In the 
normal course our sensuous cognitions take place through the 
instrumentality of the sense-organs and we are therefore limited 
by the limitations inherent in these sense-organs. But when 
knowledge of the Purusa has been obtained by performing Satnyama 
as indicated in the last Sutra these limitations fall away and it is 
possible for the Yogi to perceive everything without the help of the 
sense-organs. In exercising clairvoyance, etc., the Yogi merely 
extends the scope of the physical sense-organs but in intuitional 
Sravana, etc., he dispenses with the sense-organs altogether and uses 
his all-embracing general power of perception. 

It will help us to understand the nature of intuitional per- 
ception if we remember that the Purusa is the real perceiver 
(Diasta) . Whatever knowledge can be acquired on the lower planes 
through external agencies is present in him already in its totality. 
Whatever powers and faculties are developed in the course of 
evolution are present in him potentially from the very beginning 
and are merely brought out or unfolded from a latent state into 



342 



SECTION III (37) 



activity by the external stimuli provided by Prakrli. It appears 
that in the earlier stages of evolution it is necessary for the cogni- 
tive faculty to be differentiated and to function through separate 
channels and the sense-organs thus come into being. But after 
the mind has bqen evolved to a certain stage and the powers of 
consciousness have been sufficiently unfolded by direct contact 
with the Purus'a the cognitive faculty can function as a whole 
without the aid of the five sense-organs. Intuitional perception 
is like white light which includ.es all colours and can therefore 
bring out the characteristic colours of everything. Sensuous per- 
ception is like the colours present in the spectrum which is obtained 
from white light by diffraction with a prism. When the Togi is 
able to transcend the prism of the mind he is able to obtain 
directly all knowledge which he obtained previously through the 
separate channels of the sense-organs. 

There is difference of opinion with regard to the meaning of 
two words in the Sutra. The first of these is Prdtibha. Some com- 
mentators seem to think that Prdtibha means superphysical cognition 
and Prdtibha Sravana, etc., mean merely clairaudience, etc. There does 
not seem to be any justification for this kind of interpretation, 
firstly, because the development of these superphysical faculties 
has been dealt with in other Sutras (111-26, Ltt-42) and secondly, 
because it should not be necessary for the Togi to obtain at least 
partial knowledge of the Purusa to be able to exercise them. 
Prdtibha Sravana, etc., are obviously cognitions of a much higher 
order and from the nature of the context appear to be special 
powers connected with the Purusa himself since they appear after 
the Togi obtains at least partial contact with the pure conscious- 
ness of the Purusa. 

The second word which has prod.uced some confusion is 
Vdrtd. Although this word is not used now in relation to the 
sense of smell its use in the present context leaves no doubt that 
it is this sense for which it stands. If the sense of smell had. been 
an exception to the well-known fivefold sense experiences this fact 
would have certainly been pointed out. This anomaly shows the 
inadvisability of interpreting the Toga-Sutras strictly and rigidly in 
terms of the current meanings of the word.s used. They should be 
interpreted in the light of Togic traditions, the experiences of 



VIBHUTI PADA 



343 



mystics and occultists and also commonsense, in view of the 
frequent changes which take place in the meanings of words 
through the centuries. Philology alone is not a safe guide in these 
matters. 

Te samadhav upasarga vyutthane 
siddhayah. 

% they ^TTTEft in Samddhi W\*\*\\: obstacles oik'MM in the 
state of out-turned-ness R)4^: powers. 

38. They are. obstacles in the way of Samddhi and 
powers when the mind is outward-turned. 

The various Siddhis which have been described in Section 
III will naturally be obstacles when the Togi is diving within the 
deeper layers of his consciousness because they tend to draw 
consciousness outwards. That is why the mystic fights shy of all 
such powers. He does not want to have anything to do with 
Siddhis because their exercise creates all kinds of temptations and 
distractions in his path. But perfection means, and includes the 
power to control all the phenomena of all the planes on which 
consciousness functions and so the Perfect Man has not only to 
have direct knowledge of Reality but also knowledge and mastery 
of all planes on which his consciousness functions. That is why 
all the Siddhis have to be acquired at one stage or another before 
the stage of Perfection is reached. The Adept has not only all the 
powers which Section III deals with but also the supreme wisdom 
which makes the misuse of these powers impossible. 

4<i*lO<N«i: I 

Bandha-karana-saithilyat pracara-sam- 
vedanac ca cittasya para-sariraveSah. 



344 



SECTION in (39) 



^vet (of) bondage =m<,"i cause 9Tfa?TRT on relaxation; on 
loosening JT^R (of) passages; channels *M«Hld from knowledge of 
^ and farTFT of the mind <TT (of) another or another's mfl< (into) 
the body 3n3fi: entrance. 

39. The mind can enter another's body on relaxa- 
tion of the cause of bondage and from knowledge of 
passages. 

The power of entering the body of another person is a well- 
known Siddhi which occultists sometimes use in their work in the 
outer world. It should not be confused with obsession which it 
resembles outwardly. In obsession the entity entering the body 
is a low type of desire-bound disembodied soul who takes posses- 
sion of the physical body of his victim forcibly in order to establish 
some sort of temporary and partial contact with the physical world 
to satisfy his desires. In the exercise of this power by a Yogi of a 
high order the body of another person is taken possession of, firstly, 
with the consent and knowledge of the person who is generally a 
disciple of the Yogi and thus in perfect rapport with him. In the 
second place, there is no question of the satisfaction of any personal 
desire by the Yogi. He takes possession of the body of another 
for the purpose of doing some important and necessary work for 
the helping of humanity. In most cases the purpose of the Yogi 
can be served by temporarily materializing another artificial body 
by his Kriyd Sakti in the environment in which he wants to do his 
work. Such an artificial body, known as Mirmana-kqya, has, how- 
ever, certain limitations and it may be more convenient for him 
to take the body of a disciple for the required period. Under these 
conditions the disciple steps out of the body and the Yogi occupies 
it. The disciple remains during this period on the higher plane in 
his subtler vehicle and again occupies his body when it is vacated. 

Some people, especially in the West, feel a peculiar abhorrence 
at this idea of one person occupying the body of another. There 
is, however, no justification for this kind of feeling if the body is a 
mere tenement or an instrument for the work of the soul on the 
physical plane. We do not mind borrowing our friend's house or 



VIBHUTI PADA 



345 



car temporarily. What is then wrong in the Yogi borrowing the 
body of another person who is prepared to oblige him? This 
feeling of abhorrence is really due either to our identifying our- 
selves completely with the physical body or thinking mistakenly 
that the occupation of another's body in this manner necessarily 
means dominating his will. 

There are two conditions which have to be fulfilled before the 
Yogi is able to exercise this power. The first is the ' relaxation of 
the cause of bondage '. The bondage here . obviously means 
attachment to life in general and the physical body in particular. 
The fundamental cause of both is the five Klesas which produce 
the vehicle of Karmas as explained in 11-12. This bondage is 
loosened though not completely destroyed when the Yogi has 
attenuated the KleJas and sufficiently exhausted his Karmas through 
the practice of Yoga. 

The second condition is that the Yogi should have detailed 
knowledge of the passages or channels along which the centre of 
mind travels when it enters or leaves the body. Different Kadis 
in the body serve specific purposes and one of these Kadis called 
the Citta-Vaha-Kddi serves as a passage for the mental centre when 
it enters or leaves the body. By mental centre is meant the com- 
mon centre of the superphysical vehicles through which Citta 
functions. Many people do not realize that the exercise of the 
Yogic powers is based upon detailed and precise knowledge of the 
physical and superphysical vehicles and rigorous training is 
necessary in the application of this knowledge for particular pur- 
poses. Yoga is a Science and its requirements are as exacting as 
those of physical Science. 



Vo, 



•^<H^A<I^^M^+ , Jd+iniM^^vdc'hlPdjgr 



I 



la-jayaj jala-panka-kantakadisv 
asanga utkrantis ca. 



Udana- 



^<*M (over) one of the five Pranas or vital airs WU^ by 
mastery *FT water *TWG mire <t><Jd«*>|f<jq thorns, etc. 3RT^: non- 
contact ^o+lPd: levitation ^ and. 



346 



SECTION III (40, 41) 



40. By mastery over Udana levitation and non- 
contact with water, mire, thorns etc. 

There are five kinds of Prana working in the Prdnamaya Kosa — 
Prana, Apdna, Samdna, Uddnc and Vydna. Each of these has a 
specialized function to perform in the maintenance of the body 
and control acquired over any one kind means that the corres- 
ponding function can be regulated according to the will of the 
Yogi. Udana is obviously connected with the gravitational pull of 
the earth on the body and by controlling this particular Prana it 
is possible to neutralize this pull. Levitation is a very common 
phenomenon in Pranaydma practice and is due to the Prdnic 
currents flowing in a particular way. If the Yogi can neutralize 
the gravitational pull of the earth and keep his body floating at 
any desired level he can easily avoid contact with water, mire and 
thorns etc. 



Samana-jayaj jvalanam. 

SnTPT (over) one of the five kinds of Prdnas WU& by mastery 
v^nTT blazing (of gastric fire). 

41. By mastery over Samdna bJazing of gastric 
fire. 

The relation of Samdna Vdyu with the gastric fire and the 
digestion of food is well known Control over Samdna will naturally 
enable the Yogi to increase the intensity of the gastric fire to any 
extent and to digest any amount of food. 

That the digestion of food depends upon fire may sound 
fantastic to people with modern ideas of medical Science. But the 
word fire is not used here in its ordinary sense. Agtti is one of the 
important Tattvds which manifests in innumerable ways and the 
ordinary fire with which we are familiar is only one of these. The 
function of the gastric fire which is another form of Agni Tatfva is 



VTBHUTI PADA 



347 



to stimulate the gastric secretions and thus make the digestion of 
food possible. Yogic Science does not, therefore, contradict the 
facts of medical Science. It merely takes a more comprehensive 
view of these natural processes and. also includes within its scope 
the subtler forces and causes which are working behind them. 

The interpretation of Jvalanam as effulgence does not appear 
to be correct. In the first place, no one has ever heard of Yogis in a 
luminous condition, and even if one were found in such a condi- 
tion this could hardly be the result of the deliberate exercise of a 
Siddhi. The traditional halo of light which is seen round the head 
of very highly advanced spiritual beings is due to the luminosity 
of their superphysical auras and is not a physical phenomenon. 



V^. 3 Nkll+l4IAfl: *^r?s 



sfteTfl" I 



Srotrakasayoh sambandha-samyamad 
divyam srotram. 

sfta (of) ear 3TRfT9PTt: and space or ether 4<4'H (on) rela- 
tion *nr*TT? by performing Samyama feezf * divine '; superphysical 
«ffa*T hearing. 

42. By performing Samyama on the relation 
between Akasa and the ear superphysical hearing. 

Sound on the superphysical planes is not essentially different 
from sound on the physical plane. It is merely a continuation of 
the same kind of vibrations but finer, the sound vibrations of 
different planes being related to one another much as the different 
octaves of music. Anyone who performs Samyama on the relation 
between Akasa and the sense of hearing will become aware of the 
whole gamut of sound vibrations and be able to hear sounds of 
the superphysical planes also. Divyam Srotram is nothing but 
becoming sensitive to the subtler sound vibrations which are 
beyond the range of the physical ear. Samyama on any principle 
or force brings the consciousness of the Yogi in touch with the 
reality underlying 'that principle or force and thus makes him 



348 



SECTION III (42, 43) 



aware of all the spheres and ranges in which that principle or 
force operates. 

Kayakasayoh sambandha-samyamat 

laghu-tula^samapattes cakasa-gamanam. 

^m (of) the body 3n+l¥Wl: (and) space or ether ST^ST 
(on) relation -«'i|Mld by performing Samyama ?PT (with) light 
(opposite of heavy) ^T cotton down UHIMtI: by coalescence of the 
mind; by (bringing about) rapport ^ and 3n*>i*i space; sky 
J|*HH going in; passage through. 

43. By performing Samyama on the relation be- 
tween the body and Akasa and at the same time bring- 
ing about coalescence of the mind with light (things 
like) cotton down (there comes the power of) passage 
through space. 

Akdsa-gamanam refers to the well-known Siddhi of transferring 
the body from one place to another via Akasa. This docs not 
mean, as is generally imagined, flying through the sky bodily as a 
bird does. It involves resolving the particles of the body into 
space at one place and then reassembling them at the destination. 
The physical body is made up of innumerable particles of matter 
held together by forces of cohesion, these forces being resident in 
Akasa the universal medium. In fact, the existence of the body 
depends upon this relation between the particles of the body and 
Akasa from which they are ultimately formed . 

If the Togi performs Samyama on this relation of the physical 
body with Akasa he acquires knowledge of these forces of cohesion 
and the power to manipulate them as he likes. If after gaining 
this power he brings about coalescence of the mind with a fluffy 
substance like cotton down he causes the dispersion of the parti- 
cles of the body and their resolution into Akasa. Laghu-Tula- 
Samapatleh is a very expressive phrase which means concentrating 



VlfiHUTI PADA 



349 



the mind on the process by which cotton down is produced from 
cotton wool, namely, dispersion. This shows that if the Togi exerts 
his will-power keeping in mind a particular process he can bring 
about that process provided that he has the capacity to perform 
Samyama. To reassemble the particles at the destination all that 
is necessary is to withdraw the force of will. It was the force of 
will which kept the particles in a resolved state and as soon as this 
force is removed the forces of cohesion, reassert themselves and the 
body materializes instantaneously, apparently from nowhere. 

The technique of Akasa-gamana thus depends upon the knowl- 
edge of the forces which are responsible for the formation of 
physical objects from Akaia and the exertion of will-power in a 
particular manner. It involves the resolution of the body into 
Akasa and the reverse process of rematerialization from Akasa. 
But the knowledge is not the ordinary intellectual knowledge such 
as a scientist has. It is the direct knowledge obtainable only by 
Samyama which involves becoming one in consciousness with the 
object meditated upon. That is the significance of the word 
Samdpatteh. 

Akasa-gamana must .be distinguished from the appearance of 
a materialized body formed, by Kriya $akti at any distant place. 
In the former case, it is the original physical body of the Yogi 
which is transported to another place by a combined process of 
dissolution and materialization. In the latter case, the original 
physical body remains where it was and a second artificial body is 
temporarily materialized in another place round a Nirmana Crtta 
(IV-4). The techniques of the two processes are different and 
one or the other is adopted according to the needs of the occasion. 



Bahir akalpita yrttir maha - videha ; tatah 
praka sa var an a-ks ay ah . 

3rf|[: outside; external 31«i>IcMdl unimaginable ^f^T: state (of 
mind) J4^lfe^l (name of a) Togic Siddhi enabling the Togi to 



350 



SECTION III (44) 



remain without a body (here, the mental body) cRT: thence; from 
it 5PPT5T (of) light 3)N<«| covering SPT. wasting away. 

44. The power of contacting the state of consci- 
ousness which is outside the intellect and is therefore 
inconceivable is called Maha-videha. From it is destroyed 
the covering of light. 

If we examine the content of our mind at any moment we 
shall find in it a combination of two sets of images; one, produced 
by actual contact with the external world through the sense- 
organs, the other, the product of our own imagination. These two 
sets of images are intertwined and constitute our world image at 
any moment. What is the nature of the image produced by 
contact with the external world through the sense-organs? What 
is its origin ? If the manifested world around us is the expression 
of a Reality through Divine Ideation then it is natural to suppose 
that the world image in our mind is the result of the impact of the 
Universal Mind on our individual mind. We contact mentally 
the Universal Mind through our individual mind. The changes 
which take place in our mind continuously are thus the result of 
the continuous changes in the Universal Mind as it unfolds itself 
in the manifested Solar system independently of us. This indi- 
vidualization of the world image by our individual mind limits 
and distorts the Divine Ideation and only a faint and gloomy 
image is obtained. The light of the Universal Mind becomes 
covered, as it were, by our individual mind, and we live our life 
within the dark prison of our own mind unconscious of the fact 
that the dark and flitting shadows produced in our mind are the 
shadows of a tremendous Reality of which we can have no con- 
ception as long as our consciousness is confined within the walls 
of our prison-house. What will happen if we somehow get out 
of this prison-house ? The light of the Universal Mind will burst 
into our consciousness and we get an all-embracing vision of all 
those principles and natural laws which we can deal with, only 
One by one, and in a groping fashion, through the instrumentality 
of our intellect. This power of getting out of our intellect is 



VIBHUTI PADA 



351 



called Maha-Videha, probably because it releases the consciousness 
into the realm of the Universal Mind which works without a Dtha 
or body., The word Bahir is used because the Universal Mind is 
outside the individual mind and the world image in the individual 
mind has an external source. This all-embracing and vivid image 
which replaces the dark and partial image of the world process is 
Akalpita i.e., is outside the range of the intellect. It has an in- 
dependent reality and is inconceivable. It is a Vrtti because it is 
a passing state, but a Vrtti of the Universal Mind and not of the 
extremely limited individual mind. 

It will be seen, therefore, that the ' covering of light ' in this 
Sutra is different from the ' covering of light ' referred to in 11-52. 
There, the ' covering ' referred to the brain which covers the light 
of the mental world. Here, it refers to the individual mental body 
which covers the light of the Universal Mind. This latter process 
takes place at a later stage and at a much higher level. The 
covering referred to in 11-52 is destroyed by Pranaydma and pre- 
pares the ground for Dharana (11-53). The covering referred to in 
the present Sutra is destroyed by Samyama,' and on the unfoldment 
of intuitional perception through knowledge of the Purusa (111-36). 
This Siddhi enables the Yogi not only to transcend the sense-organs 
(111-37) but also the individual mind for which the sense-organs 
were created. It is thus complementary to the Siddhi referred to 
in ni-37. 

Sthula-s variipa-suks manvaya rthavattva- 
samyamad-bhut a-j ayah . 

FTST (on) gross (state) W^M real or constant form 5JST subtle 
(state) 3^^ all-pervading (state) 3j^ej r ej subservience to the 
purpose; function (state) WTT<T by performing Samyama ^T^T: 
mastery over the (Panca) Bhutas. 

45. Mastery over the Panca-Bhutas by performing 
Samyama on their gross, constant, subtle, all-pervading 
and functional states. 



352 



SECTION m (45) 



This Sutra and 111-48 are two of the most important and 
abstruse Sutras in this Section. It will help the student to under- 
stand their meaning if we first consider very briefly the fundamental 
ideas underlying this doctrine of Paftca-Bhutas. 

The Parka-Bhutas are also called Panca-Tattvas and it will help 
us to understand the nature of the Panca-Bhutas if we have a clear 
idea with regard to the meaning of the word Tattva. The word 
Tattva as used in the Hindu philosophical systems is one of great 
and subtle significance. Literally, it means ' that-ness '. The 
essential quality of a thing which distinguishes it from all other 
things constitutes its ' that-ness ' and so the word Tattva stands for 
the essential qualities which are embodied in different measures 
in different things. Instead of a quality, a Tattva may also mean 
a principle which is embodied in s a number of things in different 
degrees which acquire on this account a sameness of nature in 
certain matters though differing in degree and mode of expression. 
Tattva may also refer to a function and ' that-ness ' in this ease 
may consist in a group of things having a common function. But 
this must be a particular function common to a number of things 
though differing in degree and manner of expression. 

It will be seen therefore that Tattva is a word of very com- 
prehensive meaning and cannot be translated by any single word 
in English. Its significance is based really upon the fundamental 
doctrine of Hindu philosophy according to which the manifested 
Universe is an emanation of an Ultimate Reality, which pervades 
and energizes it all the time, everywhere. When the manifested 
Universe comes into being there must be underlying it a vast 
number of principles, functions, laws etc. which serve as the 
foundation for the ever-changing phenomena which constitute the 
World Process. Without such laws, principles and functions the 
manifested Universe could not be a Cosmos but would be a chaos 
which we know it is not. These different fundamental modes of 
expressions which define the relations of different parts to one 
another, determine their mutual actions and reactions and ensure 
a harmonious, ordered and continuous World Process are the 
Tattvas of Hindu philosophy. Though these Tattvas arc innumer- 
able they are not unrelated to one another, because they are all 
derived by progressive differentiation from the One Principle 



VIBHUTI PADA 



353 



which constitutes the very essence of Divine nature. Though 
they differ from each other and sometimes counteract each other 
they form an integrated whole in which each Tattva is harmonized 
and balanced by its opposite. When Pralqya takes place and the 
manifested Universe disappears these Tattvas are resolved into their 
Ultimate source to remain there in their balanced and latent 
state until another Universe is born and the World Process 
begins again. 

The Panca-Bhutas are five of these innumerable Tattvas which 
have a special function in the manifested Universe, that of relating 
matter with consciousness. The translation of the word Bhutas as 
elements, in the sense in which the word element was used for- 
merely (earth, water, air, etc.), has been a great mistake, reducing 
the whole conception behind this word to an absurd and incom- 
prehensible dogma. The identification of the Panca-Bhutas with 
states of matter (solid, liquid, gaseous, etc.) again does not give a 
correct idea about them though it is certainly an improvement on 
the previous interpretation. It is not possible to deal at length 
with the philosophy of the Panca-Bhutas here but the essential 
idea behind this doctrine of Hindu philosophy may be put in a 
nutshell as follows. 

The external world is cognized through our five jffianen- 
driyas or sense-organs. We can know the things which exist outside 
us only as they affect our sense-organs. Now, the things around 
us have innumerable qualities which are shared by them in 
different degrees and manners. How can these qualities or attri- 
butes which form a jungle of sense impressions be classified 
scientifically and simply? The Seers who dived through the 
practice of Toga into the inner and essential nature of all things 
and whose main objective was to unravel the innermost mystery 
of life adopted a perfectly scientific and yet very simple method 
of classifying these qualities. This consisted in dividing them 
into five groups according as they affected our five jHdnendriyas. 
All the multitudinous qualities through which all objects of the 
external world are cognized are classified under five heads and 
these five modes in which all things affect the mind through the 
five sense-organs are called Panca-Bhutas or Panca Tattvas. Thus 
Tejas is that all-inclusive quality which in one way or another 
23 



354 



SECTION HI (45) 



affects the retina of the eye, Akasa is that quality which affects the 

ear and so on. 

What more scientific and yet simple classification of qualities 
could be devised in order to meet the requirements of those who 
have realized the illusory nature of sensuous perception and 
are bent on discovering the reality which is hidden behind the 
phenomenal world ? Our theories of matter may change in any 
way but the essential manner of cognizing objects in the external 
world cannot change and therefore this method of classification is 
independent of all theories and discoveries which may come in the 
future development of scientific knowledge. Those who are in 
touch with the scientific advancement in this field know how the 
discoveries of one generation upset the theories of a previous 
generation and a classification based upon these passing theories 
and discoveries would always be subject to modification or com- 
plete change. But the simple method based on the conception of 
Panca-Bhutas will stand unshaken and unaffected amidst all the 
cataclysmic changes of scientific theories. 

Nor can it be said that this classification suffers from, the 
defect of over-simplification. For, it is not a mere, rough and 
ready method of classifying the external world in a crude and 
arbitrary manner. It is related to the inner nature of things which 
can be discovered only by the practice of Toga as the few Sutras 
on this subject clearly indicate. Modern scientific knowledge, 
though extraordinarily diverse, detailed and precise, suffers from 
the great defect that it is divorced from knowledge of the inner 
nature of things with which it deals. It considers matter as a 
thing apart from mi.id and consciousness and so its jurisdiction 
must always remain confined to the surface of things, their super- 
ficial appearance and behaviour. Togic philosophy, on the other 
hand, integrates into one comprehensive whole all aspects of 
manifestation — matter, mind and consciousness because it has 
discovered by its special methods that these are intimately related 
to one another. In fact, .the whole theory and practice of Toga is 
based upon this idea of the interdependence of these three realities 
of existence and the extraordinary powers which it is possible to 
acquire through Togic practices shows that the fundamental basis 
of the Togic doctrine is correct. 



vibhOti pAda 



355 



This is not the place to go into a detailed discussion with 
regard to the nature of the Panca-Bhutas, their relation with the 
Indriyas and the mind but the diagram given in explaining 11-54 
shows the various factors which are involved, according to Togic 
psychology, in the process by which the external world is cognized 
by the mind. It will be seen that the Panca-Bhutas by their peculiar 
action affect the Indriyas which then transmute the purely physical 
vibrations into sensations. The sensations are the raw material 
from which the mind elaborates the world of ideas by a process of 
integration, reproduction and rearrangement of the component 
images. But the mind also, according to Togic psychology, isjada 
(inert) and it is the illumination of the Buddhi which imparts to the 
mechanical work of the mind the element of intelligent under- 
standing. But, as this question has been dealt with thoroughly 
elsewhere, let us now pass on to the problem with which the 
present Sutra deals, namely, the mastery of the Bhutas. 

The key to the mastery of anything is a correct knowledge of 
its essential nature. All forces of Nature have been brought under 
the control of man by the discovery of laws which determine the 
action of these forces. The mastery of the Bhutas should therefore 
depend upon the discovery of their essential nature and this is 
what the Togi aims at in performing Samyama on the different 
stages through which they pass in assuming their final form. 

If we are to understand what these different stages through 
which the Bhutas pass in their involution are, we will again have to 
recall the basic doctrine of the Togic philosophy according to 
which the whole of the manifested Universe is an emanation of 
the Self. It is the Self which has become the Not-Self through a 
progressive involution of a part of Itself. This progressive involu- 
tion of consciousness accounts for the five stages or aspects of the 
Panca-Bhutas referred to in the present Sutra and also shows how 
it is possible, by reversing the process, to trace them back to their 
source. 

As it is rather difficult to comprehend the five aspects which 
the Bhutas assume in the five stages of their involution let us 
consider a simple example to illustrate how a simple outer ex- 
pression of a thing can have subtler aspects which are hidden 
from our view. Let us see what stages may be involved in the 



356 



SECTION III (45) 



manifestation of a chemical element like oxygen from the 
Divine Mind. Since oxygen has to play a definite role in the 
physical world the first step in its formation should be a con- 
ception in the Divine Mind of its function or purpose. This 
particular function called Arthavattva will first require for its 
fulfilment a particular combination of the three Gunas which 
lie at the very basis of all manifested objects. This is called 
the Anvaya state because the three Gunas are all-pervading and 
form the common substratum of all manifested objects. The 
particular combination of the Gunas from which the element 
oxygen is derived will require for its next stage in manifestation a 
particular form such as a modern electronic configuration. This 
obviously is the Suksma or subde state of the element. A partic- 
ular combination of electrons and protons with a specific arrange- 
ment and motions of the constituent particles constitutes a definite 
element wjth a definite set of qualities which characterize the 
element. These in their totality constitute the Svarupa or real 
form of the element. These essential qualities are expressed in 
different ways and varying degrees through different forms of 
oxygen such as the solid, liquid or gaseous oxygen or through 
compounds in which oxygen enters in combination with different 
elements. This is the Sthula or gross state of the element. 

We see thus how, on the basis of our ordinary knowledge, we 
can conceive of certain hidden aspects or states of such a common 
substance like oxygen. A similar though not so easily compre- 
hensible series of five states or aspects is present in the case of the 
five Bkutas through which we cognize the external world. It is 
true that the Bkutas are not elements but principles but since these 
principles find expression through the medium of matter and 
energies of various kinds their different states or aspects may be 
considered to be somewhat analogous to those of the elements. 

It should not be imagined, however, that a mere intellectual 
comprehension of these five states of the PaHca-Bhutas, however 
clear and precise it may be, will enable anybody to acquire 
mastery over them. An intellectual comprehension obtained 
through intellectual processes, as pointed out before, is utterly dif- 
ferent from the direct knowledge gained in Samadhi by performing 
Samyama. The latter kind of knowledge is obtained by becoming 



VIBHUTI PADA 



357 



one in consciousness with the thing or principle and, therefore, 
carries with it powers which are inherent in that thing or principle. 
In Samadhi we come into touch with the reality of the object 
meditated upon, while in intellectual comprehension we merely 
contact the blurred and distorted image produced by the object in 
our mind. The difference between the two is the difference 
between a substance and its shadow. 




yfa: wiro cT^rfafrr- 



*V 



Tato 'nimadi-pradurbhavah kaya-sampat 
taddharmanabhighataS ca. 

^TcT: thence; from it 3TpT*TTfe (of) Amman, etc., the group of 
eight Siddhis of which Animan is one SJT^Tfa: appearance <PTT: (of) 
the physical body *fqRT perfection; wealth ^r of them (of the 
PaHca-Bhutas) EP? attributes; functions 3Hfamd: non-obstruction; 
not-overcoming (of the Yogi's body) ^ and. 

46. Thence, the attainment of Animan etc., per- 
fection of the body and the non-obstruction of its 
functions (of the body) by the powers (of the elements) . 

This Sutra gives the three results of the mastery of the Panca- 
Bhutas. The first is the appearance of the well-known group of 
eight high occult powers known as Maka-Siddhis. These are 
Animan, Mahimdn, Laghiman, Gariman, Prapti, Prakamya, Isatva and 
Vasitva. The second result of Bhuta-Jaya is the perfection of the 
physical body which is described in the next Sutra. The third 
result is the immunity from the natural action of the PaHca-Bhutas. 
Thus the Yogi can pass through fire without being burnt. His 
physical body can enter the solid earth just as an ordinary person 
can enter water. 

These powers attained by mastery over the Bkutas appear 
most extraordinary and almost unbelievable. But they are known 
to be real as the Yogic tradition of thousands of years and the 



358 



SECTION m (46, 47) 



experiences of those who are in touch with high class Togis show. 
The previous discussion on the nature of the Panca-Bhutas and the 
way they are mastered will give some indication as to how such 
extraordinary results can follow from such a mastery. The whole 
of the phenomenal world is a play of the Panca-Bhutas and any- 
one who has acquired complete control over them naturally be- 
comes master of all natural phenomena. The student will recall 
that the Anvaya state of the PaHca-Bhutas is related to the three 
Gunas which lie at the very basis of the manifested Universe. 
Mastery of the PaHca-Bhutas thus means becoming one with the 
Divine Consciousness upon which manifestation is based and 
therefore gaining the capacity to exercise Divine powers which are 
inherent in that Consciousness. This does not mean that such a 
Yogi can do whatever he likes. He has still to work within the 
framework of natural laws, but his knowledge is so vast and his 
powers, therefore, so extraordinary that he appears capable of 
doing .anything. 

More important than the extraordinary nature of these powers 
is the question of the nature of this manifested Universe which 
the existence of such powers raises. What is the essential nature 
of the Universe in which such powers can be exercised? The 
mystery of life, matter and consciousness appears to deepen and 
acquire a new significance and we seem almost forced to the con- 
clusion that all phenomena, even those which seem to have a 
solid material basis, are a play of consciousness. The Vedantic 
doctrine ' Verily, all is Brahman ' seems to be the only plausible 
explanation. 

Rupa-lavanya-bala-vajra-samhananatvani 
kaya-sampat. 



^T beauty vtiquq fine complexion; gracefulness 3W strength 
s'wi^iiwifn adamantine-hardness; extraordinary cohesion 3>PT 
(of) the physical body ^RT perfection. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



359 



47. Beauty, fine complexion, strength and ada- 
mantine hardness constitute the perfection of the body. 

This Sutra defines the perfection of the body referred to in the 
previous SUtra. The mastery of the Bhutas will naturally lead to 
the body acquiring all these qualities because they depend upon 
the action of the Bhutas. Anyone who is master of the Bhutas can 
regulate the processes taking place in the body. Besides, when 
the distortions caused by accumulated Karma are removed the 
body tends to conform naturally to the archetype of the human 
form which is exquisitely beautiful and has the above-mentioned 
attributes. 

Let us not forget that the ugliness and imperfections in the 
physical body which we see around us are the result of the dis- 
harmonies and obstructions and Karmas which are inherent in the 
earlier stages of evolution. When these are removed on attaining 
perfection, the imprisoned splendour breaks forth even through 
the physical body which is the grossest of our vehicles. 

Grahanarsvarupasmitanvayarthavattva- 
samyamad indriya-jayah . 

^"T (on) power of cognition ; apprehension t^^s real 
nature 3)fUwi egoism ap^zr all-pervasiveness 3t Aq x<* subservience 
to the purpose; function HUH Id by performing Samyama "^P-st^Al : 
mastery over the sense-organs. 

48. Mastery over the sense-organs by performing 
Samyama on their power of cognition, real nature, 
egoism, all-pervasiveness and functions. 

This Sutra is complementary to 111-45 and what has been 
said with regard to Bhutas in connection with the former also 
applies, to some extent, to Indriyas in the latter. The successive 



360 



SECTION m (48) 



five stages on which Samyama, in relation to the sense-organs, has 
to be performed in order to gain complete mastery over them 
correspond to the five stages in the case of the Bhutas. But the 
student will notice that the stages called Sthula and Suksma in the 
case of Bhutas are replaced by Grahana and Asmita respectively in 
the case of the Indriyas. 

The first stage in the case of the Indriyas is the power of 
cognition. The exercise of every sense-organ begins with the 
response of the organ to an external stimulus which is provided 
by the PaHca-Bhutas. The mechanism through which such response 
takes place and the result of the response are, of course, different 
in the case of the five sense-organs as shown in dealing with 
111-45. So Samyama for the mastery of the Indriyas begins with 
the specific power of cognition which resides in' the particular 
sense-organ. Then comes the real nature of the sense which, of 
course, is the particular type of sensation which results and which 
is called Tanmdtra. Now, mere sensation by itself does not com- 
plete the process of sensing. The sensations must be individual- 
ized, as it were, before they can be used by the mind for con- 
structing its mental images. Without the joining of this ' I '-ness • 
with the sensation it remains merely a sensuous phenomenon and 
does not become an act of sensing. The mind cannot under these 
circumstances integrate the five sensations obtained through the 
separate channels into composite mental images. And what is at 
the basis of this individualized sensation? Is it not a mode of 
motion, a peculiar combination of the Gunas? That is the all- 
pervading aspect of the Indriyas which corresponds with the all- 
pervading aspect of the Bhutas. At this level both the Bhutas and 
Indriyas are merely particular combinations of the three Gunas. 
But behind every particular combination of the Gunas there is a 
function which that combination is meant to fulfil. This is 
the last, Arthavattva stage corresponding with the Arthavattva stage 
of the Bhutas. 

It will be seen, therefore, that both the Bhutas and Indriyas 
are initially merely functions in the Divine Mind. The exercise 
of these functions is made possible by the selection of particular 
combinations of Gunas both for the Bhutas and the Indriyas. One 
set of combination becomes the stimulator in the form of the 



VIBHUTI PADA 



361 



Bhutas and another set of combination becomes the mechanism of 
stimulation in the form of the Indriyas and the sensations which 
are the raw materials for the mind are the result of the interaction 
of the two. The one consciousness which is whole and integral 
thus divides into two streams in order to provide this subjective- 
objective play of manifestation — this Lild of Bhdgavdn. 

Y£. ^ft *H*V»lPk4- ft+WM: sraM«W*H I 

Tato manojavitvam vikararia-bhavah 
pradhana-jayas" ca. 

cRT. thence; from it Tpftsrf^^ fleetness or speed like that of 
the mind f^PTTTR": condition of being independent of instru- 
ments; un-instrumental state JJfclM*H: conquest of Pradhana, i.e. 
Prakrti ^ and. 

49. Thence, instantaneous cognition without the 
use of any vehicle and complete mastery over Pradhana. 

Just as the mastery of the Bhutas brings about three results,, 
in the same way, the mastery of the Indriyas enables the Yogi to : 
acquire two Siddhis of the most comprehensive character. The 
first of these is the capacity to perceive anything in the realm of 
Prakrti without the help of any organized vehicle of consciousness. 
Perception, in the usual course, always takes place through the 
instrumentality of the sense-organs whether these belong to the 
physical body or to the superphysical vehicles of consciousness. 
When the Yogi has obtained mastery over the sense-organs through 
Samyama he can dispense with the aid of instruments in perceiving 
anything in the manifested Universe. The non-instrumental per- 
ception is direct and instantaneous. This means that the Yogi has 
to direct his consciousness to any place or thing and he becomes 
instantaneously aware of everything which he wants to know. 

The student will notice how the enormous limitations which 
characterize ordinary perception through the sense-organs of the 
physical body fall away progressively as the Yogi makes progress 
on the path of Self-realization. The consciousness of the ordinary 



362 



SECTION in (49) 



man is confined rigidly within the physical body and the range of 
his perceptive power is limited by the capacity of its sense-organs, 
though this capacity can be enlarged gready through the use of 
the Physical instruments like the microscope, telescope, etc. When 
the jtygi develops the senses of the superphysical vehicles through 
the practice of Toga the range of his perceptive powers is increased 
enormously as indicated in 111-26. A further increase in the 
range and depth of his perceptive powers takes place when the 
capacity for Prdtibka perception is born as indicated in 111-37. In 
this type of perception it is not the sense-organs of the subtler 
vehicles but the spiritual faculty of intuition which is used. This 
faculty works within the realm of Prakrti though without the aid of 
sense-organs of any kind. In the stage to which the present Sutra 
refers even this spiritual faculty is transcended and the Purusa 
perceives by his own, over-all and all-inclusive power of-percep- 
tion. He has conquered the illusion which Prakrti imposes on his 
consciousness and the whole of her vast realm lies before him like 
an open book. 

The second result or rather aspect of Indriya-Jaya is the 
mastery of Pradhana. In transcending the limitations of instru- 
mental perception the Purusa has really transcended Prakrti and is, 
therefore, now master of Prakrti. The secret of mastering anything 
completely lies in transcending it. Karma is mastered when we 
pass beyond its operation. The physical body is mastered com- 
pletely when we can pass out of it at will and use it as a mere 
vehicle of consciousness. 

From the results which follow the mastery of Bhutas and 
Indriyas it should be clear that these words do not refer only to the 
Bhutas and Indriyas as they function on the physical plane but as 
they function on all the planes. For there is cognition through 
the sense-organs also on the superphysical planes, though the 
mechanism of cognition differs from plane to plane. The Bhutas 
and Indriyas. are, therefore, to be taken as principles which are 
applicable to the phenomena of cognition on all the planes. As 
consciousness penetrates from one plane into another the essential 
process of cognition remains the same, only the mechanism changes 
from plane to plane. The Bhutas change, the Indriyas change and 
the Drasfd changes (the Drasfa on each plane being the Purusa 



viBHUTi papa 



363 



*-., 



encased in all the vehicles not yet transcended) but the mutual 
relationship of the three remains the same. That is why the 
words used in Togic philosophy for the trio are of a most general 
nature: Grahya, Grahana and Grahilr. It will be seen, therefore, 
that the cognition of the Not-Self by the Self on the physical 
plane is the lowest manifestation of this process of cognition 
involving the subject-object- relationship and the process becomes 
more and more subtle until the Bhutas and Indriyas are completely 
mastered and the Purusa becomes independent of Prakrti. 

Another important point which should be borne in mind is 
that the phrase Vikarana Bhdva means not only cognition without the 
use of any instrument but also action without the use of any instru- 
ment. In attaining the power of cognition without any instrument 
the Togi transcends the Jnanendriyas. In attaining the power of action 
without any instrument he transcends the Karmendriyas. The former 
power without the latter would reduce the Purusa to the status of an 
impotent spectator and this would be inconsistent with the whole 
trend of thought upon which the philosophy of Toga is based . In the 
progress of the Togi knowledge and power go together and the attain- 
ment of knowledge with regard to any force or principle confers upon 
him the corresponding power -to use or manipulate that force or 
principle according to his will. Most of the third Section of the Toga- 
Sutras is devoted to the development of powers of various kinds and 
it is absurd to suppose that the Togi who hasbeen developing knowl- 
edge and power, side by side, is denuded of power at the last stage, 
all of a sudden, and becomes a mere spectator in the drama which 
is being played around him. Apart from the irrationality of this 
idea it is at complete variance with the role which Adepts in Toga 
play in the manifested Universe and with other facts known to 
practical Occultism. In thus attributing to the Purusa the dual 
role of Drasfa and Karta (Spectator and Actor) the Togic philosophy 
differs fundamentally from the orthodox Samkhya doctrine. 

Sattva-purusanyata-khyati-matrasya sarva- 
bhavadhisthatrtvam sarvajnatrtyam ca. 



364 



SECTION in (50) 



-*> 



HTr% one of three Gunas which is at the basis of the principle 
of perception; refined Buddhi 5W the individual Self 3jw4dl dis- 
tinction; difference ^TT% awareness •Hld*^ only *FT (over) all 
STR" states or forms of existence 3jfyt4idc<( supremacy *pr-?l Id^i 
omniscience ^ and. 

50. Only from the awareness of the distinction 
between Sattva and Purusa arise supremacy over all 
states and forms of existence (omnipotence) and knowl- 
edge of everything (omniscience). 

Vikarana Bhava which is gained by Indriya-Jaya (111-49) gives 
the power to exercise perception and to manipulate all the forces 
working within the realm of Prakrti without the aid of any instru- 
ments. But it does not confer on the Togi Omniscience and 
Omnipotence. This can be attained only on becoming fully aware, 
through Samyama, of the distinction between Sattva and Purusa. 
Vikarana Bhava is, however, a prerequisite for the development of 
Omnipotence and Omniscience because these are unlimited and 
cannot function through an instrument which is by its very 
nature limited. It is only on the foundations of Vikarana Bhava 
that the infinite superstructure of Omniscience and Omnipotence 
can rest. 

It should also be noted that the mastery of Pradhdna referred 
to in 111-49 can be attained merely by the separation of the Drsyam 
(11-18) from the Drasfd (11-20). But in this seeing the Drsyam 
apart from Himself the Draffd is still seeing and is thus identified 
with Sattva Guna which is the very basis of perception. As long 
as this identification remains he is limited because the Sattva Guna 
is also within the realm of Prakrti. He cannot, therefore, exercise 
Omnipotence and Omniscience. It is only when he is able to 
realize himself as separate from the power of seeing or Sattva that 
he goes completely out of the realm of Prakrti and can exercise 
Omnipotence and Omniscience. The GrahTtr must realize himself 
separate not only from Grakya but also from Grakana to become 
auite free from limitation. 



VIBHUTI PADA 



365 



This Sutra also confirms the view expressed in dealing with 
the previous Sutra that the Purusa has the dual role of Spectator 
and Actor. He not only gains more and more knowledge but also 
exercises the powers which that knowledge confers. He not only 
becomes Omniscient but also Omnipotent. The fact that the 
two functions are referred to separately in this Sutra seems to leave 
no doubt on this point. Why then does there appear to be/a 
constant emphasis on the cognitive aspect in the Toga-Sutras and 
the volitional aspect is rarely mentioned? Obviously, because 
power is a correlate of knowledge and is for all practical purposes 
included in the knowledge of the type which the Togi acquires. 

The student would do well to compare this Sutra with 111-36. 
The method prescribed in the former leads to Omniscience and 
Omnipotence while that in 111-36 leads only to the development 
of Pratibha hearing, seeing, etc. (Ill -37). The difference in the 
results which follow is due to the fact that knowledge of the Purusa 
referred to in 111-36 is partial while that referred to in 111-50 
is complete. In the total eclipse of the Sun, only a part of the 
Sun comes out of the shadow in the beginning but this portion 
becomes larger and larger until the Sun is quite out of the shadow 
cast by the moon. These two stages will serve to throw some 
light on the partial and complete separation of the Purusa from 
Prakrti referred to in the two Sutras. 



Tad-vairagyad api dosa-blja-ksaye 
kaivalyam. 

^-4<MA|ld from non-attachment to that {Siddhi referred to 
in previous Sutra) arfq" even 5fa (of) bondage; defect ^Nr seed 
SS^T on the destruction <t»=t<r^ Liberation. 

51. By non-attachment even to that, on the very 
seed of bondage being destroyed, follows Kaivalya. 



366 



SECTION III ^51, 52) 



When Omniscience and Omnipotence have developed as a 
result of awareness of the subtle distinction between the Purusa 
and Sattva the Togi has gone out of the sphere of Prakrti, but if 
there is attachment to these transcendent powers which can be 
exercised only in the realm of Prakrit he is still dependent upon 
Prakrti in a way and therefore subservient to her. Mastery over 
a thing does not necessarily mean independence from that thing 
and as long as there is dependence there is bondage. A man who 
loves a woman can have her completely in his power and yet be a 
slave to her. In this case it is the attachment to her which is the 
cause of his bondage and unless this attachment is destroyed he is 
not free and, therefore, his power over her is limited. In the same 
way, Omnipotence and Omniscience mean mastery over Prakrti 
but unless the Yogi's attachment to these is destroyed he is 
dependent upon her and therefore not quite free. And since 
Kaivalya is a state of complete freedom it can be attained only 
after this kind of attachment has been destroyed by Vairagya 
The Togi must not have the slightest attachment or attraction for 
these powers even though he may have to exercise them. 

It is obvious, therefore, that the journey towards Kaivalya is a 
process of attaining higher and higher states of knowledge and 
power and then discarding them in turn for the ultimate goal. 
Attachment to any state, however high it may be, means not only 
stoppage of further progress but also the possibility of falling 
headlong from the dizzy height which has been reached. The 
traveller must press forward relentlessly until the final goal is 
reached and he is free from this danger. 

Sthany-upanimantrane sanga-smaya- 
karanam punar anista-prasangat. 

^ifapT] (by) the local authority; the super-physical entity^ 
in charge of the world or plane; powers of spaces ^HPiH^ui on 
being invited Wff attachment; pleasure &m wonder; pride; smile 



VLBHUTI PADA 



367 



of complacence app^T avoidance; no action of 3?T: again 3Tft*£ 
(of) the undesirable; the evil Millet, because of the recurrence 
or revival. 



52. (There should be) avoidance of pleasure or 
pride on being invited by the super-physical entities in 
charge of various planes because there is the possibility 
of the revival of evil. 

It was pointed out in the previous Sutra that attachment to 
Omniscience and Omnipotence contains the seeds of bondage 
which must be destroyed by Vairagya before Kaivalya can be 
attained. This Sutra points out that attachment to these is not 
only a source of bondage but also a source of danger. The Togi 
occupying such an exalted position is always tested by the Powers 
in charge of the various departments or planes of Nature and if 
he yields to their seductions owing to lack of complete non-attach- 
ment he is sure to bring about his downfall. Being subjected to 
such temptations is the lot of all highly advanced Togis and 
references of this nature are. found in the life of all great spiritual 
teachers such as the Christ or the Buddha. The actual mode of 
tempting may not be as depicted in the colourful stories of their 
lives but that they had to pass through trials of this nature 
appears to be certain. 

It should not, however, be imagined that such temptations 
come only to those who are very highly advanced spiritually. The 
moment a Togi attains to any measure of real power he becomes 
an object of attack and has to be on his guard all the time. The 
nature of the temptations will naturally depend upon his partic- 
ular weaknesses and the stage of his development. While the 
beginner trying to break into the next super-physical plane may be 
tempted merely by elementals, those who have attained to high 
states of knowledge and power become the object of attack by 
great Devas in charge of the various departments of Nature. The 
higher the stage the subtler is the temptation and the greater is 
the degree of Vairagya needed to counteract the temptation. 



368 



SECTION III (52, 53) 



Nor must it be supposed that this constant tempting by these 
Powers is the result of malice on their part. Their work should 
be taken as a beneficent force working in Nature which tests us 
at every step so that we may be able to remove our weaknesses 
and may be able to advance steadily towards our goal. The 
student should try to imagine what would happen if there were 
no such agencies at work. Those who are treading the path of 
Self-realization would remain unconscious of their weaknesses, 
tied down to the lower stages and unable to advance further. The 
sword of temptation which searches out and strikes our weaknesses 
certainly causes us temporary suffering and anguish but it also 
gives us an opportunity for removing those weaknesses and thus 
frees us for advancing further on the Path. 

Ksana-tat-kramayohsamyamad vivekajam 
jnanam. 

5TT (on) moment rRT-sPPft: (and) its order; succession *HJ4ld 
by performing Samyama (cH+^i born of awareness of Reality ?TFPT 
knowledge. 

53. Knowledge born of awareness of Reality by 
performing Samyama on moment and (the process of) 
its succession. 

This Sutra should be studied along with IV-33 in discussing 
which the Togic theory of Ksana and nature of time has been 
explained. K$ana-Tat-Kramayo}i is the process by which the eternal 
Reality which transcends time is projected in manifestation in 
terms of time. This obviously is the last veil of illusion which 
must be pierced before the Togi can attain Kaivalya. The techni- 
que of piercing this final veil is the same as in the case of others — 
Samyama. The knowledge which is gained as a result of performing 
Samyama on the process of time is the highest kind of knowledge 



VIBHUTI PADA 



369 



"which can be attained— even higher than Omniscience referred to 
in 111-50. It is called Vivekajam- Jnanam ' knowledge born of the 
awareness of Reality '. The word Viveka is generally translated 
into English by the word ' discrimination ' but the use of this 
Word, in the present context is not appropriate. The word ' dis- 
crimination' is used ordinarily for that process of spiritual discern- 
ment which enables us to detect the illusions of life and to discover 
the relative reality hidden behind them. But the word Viveka in 
the present context stands for the full awareness of the Ultimate 
Reality. Essentially the process is the same in both the cases and 
involves passing from a less real to a more real state of conscious- 
ness but the difference in degree is so tremendous that the use of 
the rather vague word ' discrimination ' for this final ' discovery ' 
may not give an adequate conception of the change which is 
involved. It is, therefore, better to translate the phrase Viveka- 
jam-jMnam by ' awareness of the Ultimate Reality ' because the 
use of the word knowledge in connection with this exalted state 
of consciousness does not seem to be proper. A state of conscious- 
ness which transcends Omniscience itself cannot be called knowl- 
edge. It is better to use for it the phrase given above. 

Jati-laksana-desair anyatanavacchedat 
tulyayos tatah pratipattih. 

vj||fd (by) class SRTW characteristic ^3T: place; position 
•SMdl (of) separateness; difference 3H=|-o&<iid because of the 
absence of definition ^fft: of the two equals ?RT: from it 
Hfa4lri: understanding; knowledge (of distinction). 

54. From it {Vivekajam- Jnanam) knowledge of 
distinction between similars which cannot be distin- 
guished by class, characteristic or position. 

The fact that Vivekajam- J Mnatn transcends Time leads to the 
attainment of a peculiar, and from the intellectual point of view, 
24 



370 



SECTION III (54, 55) 



an interesting power. The significant word in This Sutra is Prati- 
patlilj.. What does it mean ? Samdpatlih is the fusion of two things 
apparently separate. Pratipattifr is the resolution of two things 
originally fused or inseparable. Now, what is the Yogi to do if he 
has to distinguish between two things which are indistinguishable 
by the ordinary methods, namely, by differences of class, charac- 
teristic or positicn? 

To have some idea of the method which can be adopted in 
solving such a problem it is necessary to remember, that if two 
things are exactly similar and occupy the same position it means 
that they appear and disappear alternately in that position. And 
under these circumstances the time factor alone can distinguish 
between them. You will have to subject tbem to a time analysis 
of greater resolving power than the frequency with which they 
replace each other in the same position. But the frequency with 
which two things can replace each other in this manner has a 
limiting value and that is the frequency with which Ksanas or 
moments succeed each other. Therefore, anyone who can go 
beyond the process of time referred to in the last Sutra should be 
in a position to distinguish between two such things. 

The other powers of the Yogi will enable him to distinguish 
between two things apparently similar. This Sutra is concerned 
not with such ordinary similarities but with similarities of a very 
subtle nature which baffle even Omniscience. For this Siddhi, as 
the context shows, comes last of all when even time is transcended 
and the Yogi is established in the Eternal Reality which trans- 
cends all limitations and illusions. 

Tarakam sarva-visayam sarvatha-visayam 
akramam ceti vivekajam-jnanam. 

dl<+ transcendent; that which helps to ' cross over ' (the 
ocean of existence) *Hfaq4 cognizing all objects at once or simul- 
taneously ^HNrTfaW*r pertaining to all objects whatsoever in 
the past, present and future; pertaining to all objects and processes 



VIBHUTI PADA 



371 



and in all time and all space diH>H successionless; orderless; trans- 
cending the World Process ^ and ^fcT finish ; end of anything (here 
subject) facj=M 3TH*T knowledge born of the awareness of Reality. 

55. The highest knowledge born of the awareness 
of Reality is transcendent, includes the cognition of all 
objects simultaneously, pertains to all objects and pro- 
cesses whatsoever in the past, present and future and 
also transcends the World Process. 



111-53 dealt with the method of obtaining the highest knowl- 
edge which is the ultimate objective of Yoga. This Sutra defines 
the nature of this knowledge. In the first place, it is transcendent, 
i.e., it transcends all forms of knowledge within the sphere of 
phenomenal existence. It is the knowledge or rather full aware- 
ness of Reality while all other forms of knowledge, even those 
/pertaining to the highest levels of consciousness are in the realm 
of Relativity. The word Tarakam also means that which enables 
the Yogi to cross over Bhava Sdgara or the ocean of conditioned 
existence. The soul which is involved in the limitations and 
illusions of conditioned existence is liberated completely from these 
on the attainment of Tarafca-Jnana. 

In the second place, this knowledge is Sarva-Visqyam. This 
means not only embracing all objects but having all objects in 
consciousness simultaneously. Sarvathd-Visayam means knowledge 
pertaining to the past, present and future. Just as Sarva-Visqyam 
has reference to space so Sarvathd-Visayam has reference to time. 
So Vivekajam-Jndnam includes everything within the realm of time 
and space, i.e., all things which are within the World Process. 

In the third place, Vivekajam-Jndnam is Akramam, i.e., 
transcends the World Process which produces time. In the world 
of the Relative which is subject to the World Process things take 
place one after another and it is this which produces the impres- 
sion of past, present and future. In the world of Reality which is 
beyond the World Process time cannot exist and this timeless 
condition is called the Eternal. This is not a mere, interesting 



372 



SECTION HI (55, 56) 



hypothesis. Time according to the highest occultists and mystics 
has no real existence. It is merely an impression produced in 
consciousness by the succession of phenomena which are produced 
by the World Process. When, therefore, the Yogi transcends the 
World Process he also conquers the illusion of time. This is the 
most fundamental illusion in Which his consciousness is involved and 
is therefore, naturally, the last to disappear as pointed out in IV-33. 

The fact that Vivekajam-Jndnam is Sarva-Visayam, Sarvathd- 
Visayam and Akramam at the same time, means that the world of 
the Real is not spmething apart from the world of the Relative". 
Passing into the world of the Real does not therefore mean leaving 
the world of the Relative behind. It means seeing the world of 
the Relative in its true nature and correct perspective and living 
in that world in the light of the Real. Established in his true 
Self the Self-realized Yogi can live and work in the world of the 
Relative, using all the powers which Prakrti has placed at his 
disposal but without being in the least affected by the illusions 
which she creates for those who have not yet mastered her. 

The student will see that 111-55 gives with marvellous lucidity 
and in a few words the essential characteristics of the Eternal 
Reality which is the goal of Yogic training and discipline. Of 
course, he will not be able to have from this intellectual istatement 
the slightest idea with regard to the actual nature of the experience 
of this Reality but he will be able to see that it is something 
tremendous and worth striving after. The word Iti merely indicates 
the close of the subject (Siddhis) which was being dealt with. 

Sattva-purusayoh suddhi-samye kaivalyam. 

^T^Wfi: of Sattva and Purusa Srfe (of) purity ^TF^ on 
equality +<4<H4H s Liberation. 

56. Kaivalya is attained when there is equality of 
purity between the Purusa and Sattva. 

This Sutra completes the idea already dealt with partly in 
111-36 and 111-50. In 111-36 it was pointed out that Sattva and 



VIBHUTI PADA 



373 



Purufa though ordinarily indistinguishable are quite distinct and it 
is possible to know the; Purusa apart from Sattva. In 111-50 it was 
made clear that it is only on knowing the Purusa completely apart 
from Sattva that the limitations which Prakrti places on the knowl- 
edge and power of the Purusa can be destroyed. But this realiza- 
tion of the utterly distinct nature of the Purusa and Sattva cannot 
take place suddenly. It proceeds by states and with each clearer 
realization of the distinct nature of the Purusa and Sattva the Yogi 
approaches nearer to his goal of complete freedom from limitations 
and illusions. 

It should be noted that the purification of Sattva means in 
effect this progressive realization on the part of the Yogi and not 
some substantial change in his nature, and the increasing aware- 
ness of Reality which accompanies this realization is also not 
connected with any substantial change. It is a matter of realiza- 
tion only. That is why it is called Vivekajam-Jndnam. The 
purification of Sattva and Purusa becomes equal when the Yogi has 
realized fully the distinction between the Purusa and Sattva. The 
Sattva or perception of the Yogi is free from the illusion of apparent 
identity of the Purusa and Sattva and the Self-realization of the 
Purusa is free from any self-identification with the Sattva. 

When the conditions mentioned above are present the presence 
of Sattva does not interfere with the Self-realization of the Yogi. 
He may remain within the realm of Prakrti and yet be in full 
realization of his Eternal nature. From this Sutra it is clear that 
'Kaivalya does not necessarily mean the separation of Purusa and 
Prakrti. If the Sattva has been purified to the necessary extent the 
Purusa can function through Prakrti in full realization of his Real 
nature, and always free. Thus, it is the realization of his 
Svarupa in the fullest degree which is the characteristic and indis- 
pensable condition of Kaivalya and not the separation from Prakrti. 
The ' isolation ' of Kaivalya is thus subjective and not necessarily 
objective. The vehicles that have been built up and perfected 
by him in the realm of Prakrti can then be used by him for any 
kind of work without egoism and without any illusions. Such are 
the perfected men of humanity, the Adepts of Yoga who are the 
masters of this Sacred Science and who guide humanity in its 
progress towards perfection. 



KAIVALYA PAD A 



Janmausadhi-mantra-tapah-samadhi-jah 
siddhayah. 

3p*T birth ajfafs* drugs TF& incantation; a group of words 
whose constant repetition produces specific results cTT. austerities; 
purificatory actions; penance y^lRj trance -^TT: born of; are the 
result of R144J: attainments; occult powers. 

1. The Siddhis are the result of birth, drugs, 
Mantras, austerities or Safnddhi. 

Section IV of the Toga-Sutras provides the theoretical back- 
ground for the technique of Toga which has been dealt with in 
the previous three Sections. It deals with the various general 
problems which form an integral part of the Togic philosophy and 
which must be clearly understood if the practice of Toga is to be 
placed on a rational basis. The practice of Toga is not a sort of 
floundering in the Unknown for attaining a vague spiritual ideal. 
Toga is a Science based upon a perfect adaptation of well-defined 
means to an unknown but definite End. It takes into account all 
the factors which are involved in the attainment of its objective 
and provides a perfectly coherent philosophical background for 
the practices which are its more essential part. It is true that the 
doctrines which constitute this theoretical background will hardly 
appear rational or intelligible to people who are not familiar with 
this subject but that is true of any kind of knowledge which deals 
with problems of an unfamiliar nature. It is only those who have 
given considerable thought to this subject and are familiar at least 
with the elementary doctrines of the Togic philosophy who can be 
expected to appreciate the grand and almost flawless Kne of 



378 



SECTION IV (1) 



reasoning which underlies the apparently disconnected topics 
dealt with in Section IV. 

As this Section deals with many difficult topics which are 
apparently unconnected, it will perhaps help the student to grasp 
the underlying thread of reasoning running throughout the Section 
if a synopsis of the whole Section is given at the beginning. This 
will inevitably involve some repetition of ideas but such a bird's- 
eye view will be definitely helpful in understanding this rather 
abstruse aspect of Togic philosophy. 

SYNOPSIS 

Sutra 1 : This enumerates the different methods of acquiring 
Siddhis. Of the five methods given only the last based upon 
Samddhi is used by advanced Yogis in their work because it is based 
upon direct knowledge of the higher laws of Nature and is, there- 
fore, under complete control of the will. The student must have 
noticed that all the Siddhis described in the previous Section are 
the result of performing Samyama. They are the product of evo- 
lutionary growth and thus give mastery over the whole range of 
natural phenomena. 

Sutras 2-3: These two Sutras hint at the two fundamental 
laws of Nature which govern the flux of phenomena constituting 
the world of the Relative. An understanding of these two laws 
is necessary if we are to form a correct estimate of the functions 
and limitations of Siddhis. The student should not run away with 
the impression that it is possible for the Togi to do anything he 
likes because he can bring about many results which appear 
miraculous to our limited vision. The Yogi is also bound by the 
laws of Nature and as long as his consciousness functions in the 
realms of Nature, it is subject to the laws which govern these 
realms. He has to work out his liberation from the realm of 
Prakrti but he can do so only by obeying and utilizing the laws 
which operate in her realm. 

Satras 4-6: The Yogi brings from his past lives, like every- 
one else, an enormous number of tendencies and potentialities in 
the form ofKarmas and Vasanas. These exist in his subtler vehicles 
in a very definite form and have to be worked out or destroyed 



KATVALYA PADA 



379 



before Kaivalya can be attained. These Sutras refer to these in- 
dividual vehicles which are of two types — those which are the 
product of evolutionary growth during successive lives and those 
which the Yogi can create by the power of his will. Before one 
can understand the methods adopted for the destruction of Karmas 
and Vasanas he should have some knowledge of the mental mechan- 
isms through which these tendencies function. 

Sutras 7-1 1 : These deal with the modus operandi by which the im- 
pressions of our thoughts, desires and actions are produced and 
then worked out during the course of successive lives in our 
evolutionary growth. The problem for the Yogi is to stop adding 
to these accumulated impressions by learning the technique of 
Jtfiskama Karma and desirelessness and to work out those poten- 
tialities which have already been acquired in the quickest and 
most efficient manner. The destruction of the subtler or dormant 
Vasanas depends ultimately upon the destruction of ' Avidya which 
is the cause of attachment to life. 

Siitras 12-22: After dealing with the vehicles of the mind (Citta) 
and the forces ( Vasanas) which bring about incessant transformations 
(Vrttis) in these vehicles Patanjali discusses the theory of mental per- 
ception^ using the word ' mental ' in its most comprehensive sense. 
According to him two entirely different kinds of. elements are in- 
volved in mental perception. On the one hand, there must be the 
impact of the object upon the mind through their characteristic 
properties and, on the other, the eternal P«n«rt must illuminate the 
mind with the light of his consciousness. Unless both these condi- 
tions are simultaneously present there can be no mental perception 
because the mind itself is inert and incapable of perceiving. It is 
the Purusa who is the real perceiver though he always remains in the 
background and the illumination of the mind with the light of his 
consciousness makes it appear as if it is the mind which perceives. 
This fact can be realized only when the mind is entirely trans- 
cended and the consciousness of the Purusa is centred in his own 
Svarupa in full awareness of Reality. 

Sutra 23 : This throws a flood of light on the nature of Citta and 
shows definitely that the word Citta is used by Patanjali in the 
most comprehensive sense for the medium of perception at all 
levels of consciousness and not merely as a medium of intellectual 



380 



SECTION IV (1) 



perception as commonly supposed. Wherever there is perception 
in the Relative realm of Prakrti there must be a medium through 
which that perception takes place and that medium is Gitta. So 
that even when consciousness is functioning on the highest planes 
of manifestation, far beyond the realm of the intellect, there is a 
medium through which it works, however subtle this medium may 
be, and this medium is also called Gitta. 

Sutras 24-25 : These two Sutras point out the nature of the 
limitations from which life suffers even on the highest planes of 
manifestation. The Purusa is not Only the ultimate source of all 
perception as pointed out in IV-18 but he is also the motive 
power or reason of this play of Vasanas which keep the mind in 
incessant activity. It is for him that all this long evolutionary 
process is taking place although he is always hidden in the back- 
ground. It follows from this that even in the exalted conditions 
of consciousness which the Togi might reach in the higher stages 
of Toga he is dependent upon something distinct and separate, 
though within him. He cannot be truly Self-sufficient and Self- 
illuminated until he is fully Self-realized and has become one with 
the Reality within himself. It is the realization of this fact, of 
his falling short of his ultimate objective, which weans the Togi 
from the exalted illumination and bliss of the highest plane and 
makes him dive still deeper within himself for the Reality which 
is the consciousness of the Purusa. 

Sutras 26-29: These Sutras give some indication of the 
struggle in the last stages before full Self-realization is attained. 
This struggle culminates ultimately in Dharma-Megha-Samddhi 
which opens the door to the Reality within him. 

Sutras 30-34: These Sutras merely indicate some of the 
consequences of attaining Kaivalya and give a hint about the 
nature of the exalted condition of consciousness and freedom from 
limitations in which a fully Self-realized Purusa lives. No one, of 
course, who has not attained Kaivalya can really understand what 
this condition is actually like. 

After taking a bird's-eye view of the Section let us now deal 
with the different topics one by one. In the first Sutra Patanjali 
gives an exhaustive list of methods whereby occult powers may be 



KAIVALYA PADA 



381 



acquired. Some people are born with certain occult powers such 
as clairvoyance etc. The appearance of such occult powers is not 
quite accidental but is generally the result of having practised 
Toga, in some form or another, in a previous life. All special 
faculties which we bring over in any life are the result of efforts 
which we have made in these particular directions in previous 
lives and Siddhis are no exception to this rule. But the fact that a 
person has practised Toga and developed these powers in previous 
lives does not mean necessarily that he shall be born with those 
powers in this life. These powers have generally to be developed 
afresh in eacl successive incarnation unless the individual is very 
highly advanced in this line and brings over from previous lives 
very powerful Samskarcs. It is also necessary to remember in this 
connection that some people whose moral and intellectual devel- 
opment is not very highly advanced are sometimes born with 
certain spurious occult powers. This is due to their dabbling in 
Togic practices in their previous lives as explained in 1-19. 

Psychic powers of a low grade can often be developed by the 
use of certain drugs. Many Fakirs in India use certain herbs like 
Ganja for developing clairvoyance of a low order. Others can 
bring about very remarkable chemical changes by the use of 
certain drugs or herbs, but those who know these secrets do not 
generally impart them to others. Needless to say that the powers 
obtained in this manner are not of much consequence and should 
be classed with the innumerable powers which modern Science 
has placed at our disposal. 

The use of Mantras is an important and potent means of 
developing Siddhis and the Siddhis developed in this manner may 
be of the highest order. For, some of the Mantras like Pranava 
or Gdyatri bring about the unfoldment of consciousness and 
there is no limit to such unfoldment. When the higher levels of 
consciousness are reached as a result of such practices the powers 
which are inherent in those states of consciousness begin to appear 
naturally, though they may not be used by the devotee. Besides 
the natural development of Siddhis in this manner, there 
are specific Mantras for the attainment of particular kinds of 
objectives and when used with knowledge in the right manner 
bring about the desired results with the certainty of a scientific 



382 



SECTION IV (1) 



experiment. The Tantras are full of such Mantras for obtaining very 
ordinary and sometimes highly objectionable results. The reason 
why the ordinary man cannot get the desired results by simply 
following the directions in the books lies in the fact that the exact 
conditions are deliberately not given and can be obtained only 
from those who have been regularly initiated and have developed 
the powers. Of course, the true Yogi regards all such practices 
with contempt and never goes near them. 

Tapas is another well-recognized means of obtaining Siddhis. 
The Pura.rj.as are full of stories of people who obtained all kinds of 
Siddhis by performing austerities of various kinds and thus pro- 
pitiating different deities. Those stories may or may not be true 
but that Tapas leads to the development of certain kinds of occult 
powers is a fact well known to all students of Yoga. The important 
point to be noted in this connection is that the Siddhis acquired 
by this method, unless they are the result of the general unfold- 
ment of consciousness by the practice of Yoga, are of a restricted 
nature and do not last for more than one life. And it frequently 
happens that the person who acquires such a Siddhi, being 
morally and spiritually undeveloped, misuses it, thus not only 
losing the power but bringing upon himself a lot of suffering and 
evil Karma. 

The last and the most important means of developing Siddhis 
is the practice of Samyama. The major portion of Section III deals 
with some of the Siddnis that may he developed in this manner. 
The list of Siddhis referred to in that Section is not exhaustive but 
the more important ones are given. They should be taken merely 
as representative of an almost innumerable class to which refer- 
ences are found in Yogic literature. 

One fact has, however, to be noted in this connection. The 
Siddhis which are developed as a result of the practice of Samyama 
belong to a different category and are far superior to those 
developed in other ways. They are the product of the natural 
unfoldment of consciousness in its evolution towards perfection and 
thus become permanent possessions of the soul, although a little 
effort may be needed in each new incarnation to revive them in 
the early stages of Yogic training. Being based upon knowledge 
of the higher laws of Nature operating in her subtler realms they 



KAIVALYA PADA 



383 



can be exercised with complete confidence and effectiveness, much 
in the same way as a trained' scientist can bring about extra- 
ordinary results in the field of physical Science. 

^. >3nw*f<TMf<uim: 5R7c*n^TRT i 

Jaty-antara-pariiiamah prakrty-apurat. 

«iMtK into another class, species or kind hR«iii: change; 
transformation 5T^T Nature which makes, acts, creates; natural 
tendencies or potentialities 3TT^RT by the filling up or overflow. 

2. The transformation from one species or kind 
into another is by the overflow of natural tendencies or 
potentialities. 

The word Jati is generally used in Samskrta for class, species 
etc , but in tbe context in which it is used here it is obvious that 
it has to be interpreted in a much wider sense. It is only, then 
that the profound significance of the Sutra reveals itself and can be 
understood in terms of modern scientific thought. 

It is difficult to grasp the underlying idea of this Sutra from 
its mere translation and it will, therefore, be necessary to explain 
its real significance in some detail. Jdty-Antdra-Pariridma means a 
transformation involving a fundamental change of nature or 
substance such as genus or chemical composition and not merely 
a change of state or form. Thus when water is changed into ice 
it is merely a change of state and does not involve an essential 
change of substance. When a bangle made of gold is changed 
into a necklace, again, there is no fundamental change but merely 
a change of form. But when hydrogen is changed into helium, or 
uranium is changed into lead, it is a fundamental change °f sub- 
stance and comes under Jaty-Antara-Parindma. Now the Sutra lays 
down that all such changes involving fundamental differences can 
^ place only when there is present in the substance the poten- 
tiality for the change under the specified conditions. Prahrty- 
^St h a beautiful and pregnant phrase for expressing a very 



384 



SECTION IV (2 3 3) 



comprehensive scientific law. Literally, it means ' by the flow of 
Prakrti'; but let us try to understand in terms of modern Science 
what the real significance of this phrase is. It will be best to 
take a few facts from our common experience to illustrate the 
working of this law. If we take a dry mass of wood and apply a 
burning match to it, the wood immediately takes fire and a whole 
timber yard may be reduced to ashes in a short time. But if we 
apply a burning match to a heap of bricks and mortar nothing 
happens. Why? Because, wood has in it the potentiality of com- 
bining with the oxygen of the air with the liberation of a great 
amount of heat and a number of volatile products and as the 
reaction is self-propagating involving a sort of ' chain reaction ' a 
mere spark is enough to reduce the whole mass of wood to ashes. 
But in the case of bricks and mortar there is no potentiality to 
react in this manner and, therefore, when the match is applied 
nothing happens. Change, in such a case, therefore, takes place 
according to the potentialities existing in the material and follows 
the tendency of natural forces under the given conditions. If 
the conditions change, the tendencies may also change and an 
entirely new kind of change may be brough t about. For example, 
the wood may be subjected to the action of certain chemical 
substances and converted into charcoal. Let us take another 
example. A breeder can evolve a new species of dog by the 
appropriate crossing of different kinds of dogs but he cannot 
produce a new species of cat in this manner. The potentiality 
for the production of a new species of cat does not exist in the 
latter case. Here again, therefore, we are bound by limitations 
set by natural tendencies and potentialities and cannot go against 
them. It is true that if we have the necessary knowledge we can, 
by the introduction of new factors, bring about changes which 
appeared impossible before, but that does not mean that we have 
violated the fundamental law of Nature referred to above. 

Nimittam aprayojakam prakrtlnam varana- 
bhedas tu tatah ksetrikavat. 



KAIVALYA PADA 



385 



fnfHrH incidental cause srspfftPP non-urging; not directly 
causing M^dlHIH of natural tendencies; of predisposing causes 
^Vf obstacle ^3T: piercing through; removal g verily; on the 
other hand ^T. from that $(tf«t><=ld like the farmer. 



3. The incidental cause does not move or stir up 
the natural tendencies into activity; it merely removes 
the obstacles, like a farmer (irrigating a field) . 

The idea embodied in IV-2 is further elaborated in IV-3. 
Transformation from one kind into another takes place, as we 
have seen, according to the resultant effect of all forces involved. 
Everything has the potentiality of changing in a number of 
directions and by bringing to bear upon it different kinds of 
forces, we can make it change in one or another of the directions 
as illustrated in the following diagram. 




G»< 



>C 



Fig. 11 

If we have a beaker full of sugar solution wc can change the sugar 
into alcohol by inoculating the solution with a certain kind of 
ferment, we can change it inio a mixture of glucose and fructose 
by adding hydrochloric acid, we can change it into carbon by 
adding strong sulphuric acid and so on. All these different kinds 
of changes can be brought about by producing different condi- 
tions, by applying different kinds of stimuli for the manifestation 
of different potentialities. But the potentialities for all these 
changes already exist in the sugar solution. We cannot, for 
25 



386 



SECTION IV (3) 



instance, change the sugar into mercury because there is no poten- 
tiality, in the chemical sense, for sugar to change into mercury. 

The incidental or existing cause which seems outwardly to 
bring about the change is not the real cause of the change. The 
change is really brought about by the predisposing causes deter- 
mined by the nature of potentialities existing in the things under- 
going change. What the incidental cause does is merely to 
determine in which direction change will take place and thus to 
direct the flow of natural foixes in that particular direction. 

The respective role of the exciting and predisposing causes 
in bringing about all kinds of changes in Nature is then further 
made clear by the use of a very apt simile " like a farmer ". Any- 
one who has observed a farmer directing the current of water into 
different parts of a field will see at once how closely such a process 
resembles the action of natural forces being directed by one or 
the other of the outward causes which seem to bring about differ- 
ent kinds of changes. He removes a little earth here and the 
water begins to flow in one furrow. Then he closes tip the gap 
and makes a breach at another place and the water begins to flow 
in another direction. The removal of a little earth from one 
particular spot does not produce the current of water. It merely 
removes an obstacle in the path of the water and determines the 
direction of the current. 

The great natural law embodied in the above two Sutras is 
applicable not only to physical phenomena but to all kinds of 
phenomena in the realm of Prakrti. For example, the nature of 
our actions, good or bad, does not make our life. It merely deter- 
mines the direction of our future lives. The current of our life 
must flow on incessantly, its direction being continually determined 
by our actions, thoughts and feelings. 

The student may well ask: " What has this law to do with 
Toga?" Everything. As has been pointed out before, the Yogi 
has to work out his liberation with the help of the laws which 
operate in the realm of Prakrti and he, therefore, ought to have a 
clear idea of this fundamental law which determines the flux of 
phenomena taking place around him and within him. As he has 
to destroy completely, and for ever, certain deep-seated tendencies 
in his nature he ought to know their root causes which give rise to 



KAIVALYA PADA 



387 



different forms of those tendencies. He ought to know that mere 
suppression of a tendency does not mean its removal It will lie 
low in a, potential form for an indefinite period and then again 
raise its head when suitable conditions present themselves. It is 
no use merely removing the exciting causes. The predisposing 
causes must be removed. The modern tendency is to deal only 
with the superficial causes and to get over the present difficulties 
somehow. This leads us nowhere and continually brings before us 
the old troubles in new and different forms. 

V. fa*rfl|faTil"A|R^dHldld I 

Nirmana-cittany asmita.-ma.trat. 

frmW created; artificial p^TllfH minds 3|f*Hdl egoism;. 
I-am-ness'; sense of individuality JfraM from alone. 

4. Artificially created minds (proceed) from. 
* egoism ' alone. 

The two previous Sutras should prepare the ground for under- 
standing the modus operandi of the method by which any number 
of additional ' minds ' can be artificially produced by the highly 
advanced Yogi. Citta, as pointedoutin 1-2, is the universal principle 
which serves as a medium for all kinds of mental perceptions. 
But this universal principle can function only through a set of 
vehicles working on the different planes of the Solar system. 
These vehicles of consciousness, or Kosas as they are called, are 
formed by the appropriation and integration of matter belonging 
to different planes round an individual centre of consciousness and 
provide the necessary stimuli for mental perceptions which take 
place in consciousness. Patanjali has used the same word, Citta, 
for the universal principle which serves as a medium for mental 
perception as well as the individual mechanism through which 
such perception takes place. It is necessary to keep this distinction 
in mind because one or the other of the two meanings is implied 
by the same word — Citta — at different places. 



388 



SECTJON rv (4) 



Since the object of Section IV is partly to elucidate the nature 

of Gift a, the question of the creation of ' artificial minds ' has been 

dealt with by Patanjali in this Section. There is, of course, a 

' natural mind ', if we may use such a phrase, through which the 

individual works and evolves in the realms o£Prakrti during the long 

course of his evolutionary cycle. That mind, working through a 

set of vehicles, is the product of evolution, carries the impressions 

of all experiences through which it has passed in successive lives 

and lasts till Kaivalya is attained. But, during the course of the 

Togic training when the Togi has acquired the power of performing 

Samyama and manipulating the forces of the higher planes, 

especially Mahat-Tattva, it is possible for him to create any number 

of mental vehicles by duplication, vehicles which are an exact 

replica of the vehicle through which he normally functions. Such 

vehicles of consciousness are called Kirmana-Cittani and the 

question arises: ' How are these " artificial minds " created by the 

Togi?' The answer to this question is given in the Sutra under 

discussion. 

Such artificial minds with their appropriate mechanism are 
created from ' AsmitS alone '. Asmita is, of course, the principle 
of individuality in man which forms, as it were, the core of the 
individual soul and maintains in an integrated condition all the 
vehicles of consciousness functioning at different levels. It is this 
principle which on identification with the different vehicles, pro- 
duces egoism and other related phenomena which have been 
dealt with thoroughly in II-6. This principle is called Mahat- 
Tattva in Hindu philosophy and it is through its agency that 
-artificial minds can be created. The advanced Togi who can 
control the Mahat-Tattva has' the power of establishing any number 
of independent centres of consciousness for himself and as soon as 
such a centre is established an ' artificial mind ' automatically 
materializes round about it. This is an exact replica of the 
' natural mind ' in which he functions normally and remains in 
existence as lon^ as he wills it to be maintained. The moment 
the Togi withdraws his will from the ' artificial mind ' it disappears 
instantaneously. 

It is worthwhile noting the significance of the word ' alone ' 
in the Sutra. The significance, of course, is that the creation of an 



KAIVALYA PA DA 



389 



' artificial mind ' does not require any other operation except that 
of establishing a new centre of individuality. The precipitation 
of an ' artificial mind ' round about this centre is brought about 
automatically by the forces" of Prakrti because the capacity of 
gathering a ' mind ' round itself is inherent in the Mahat-Tattva. 
There is nothing extraordinary or incredible in such materializa- 
tions and similar phenomena take place even on the physical 
plane. What happens when we place a tiny seed in the ground? 
The seed, by the potential power which is inherent in it, immediately 
begins to work upon its surroundings and gradually elaborates a 
tree from the matter appropriated from its environment. The 
flow of natural forces brings about all the necessary changes 
needed for this development. Do we know the secret of this 
power ? No ! But still it exists and we see its action all around us 
in every sphere of life. What is, therefore, incredible or miraculous 
in a centre established in the Mahat-Tattva gathering a Gitta or 
' mind ' round itself by the automatic action of natural forces 
(Prakrti-Apuraf) ? The only difference is that of time. While the 
tree takes considerable time to grow, the production of the ' arti- 
ficial mind ' seems to take place instantaneously. But time is a 
relative thing and its measure varies according to the plane upon 
which it functions. 

The automatism which is involved in the creation of ' artificial 
minds ' cannot be adequately understood unless we have a clear 
grasp of the natural law enunciated in IV-2-3. This, no doubt, 
partly accounts for the insertion of these two Sutras before the 
problem of ' artificial minds ' is dealt with by the author. 



Pravrtti-bhede prayojakam cittam ekam 
anekesam. 



M<=lftf activity; pursuit ?H* in the difference 5pffcpP*r direct- 
ing; moving fa^T*T mind rnjnr one 3H+t[|*j of many. 



390 



SECTION IV (5, 6) 



5. The due (natural) mind is the director or 
mover of the many (artificial) minds in their different 
activities. 

If the Yogi can duplicate his ' mind ' at different places the 
question arises: ' How are the activities of these " artifical minds " 
thus created, co-ordinated and controllea? ' According to this Sutra 
the activities and functions of the ' artificial minds ' — whatever 
their number — are directed and controlled by the one ' natural 
mind' of the Yogi. The ' artificial minds ' are merely the instru- 
ments of the one ' natural mind ' and obey it automatically. Just 
as the activities of the hands and other organs working in the 
physical body are co-ordinated by the brain and are directly under 
its control, in the same way the activities of the ' artificial minds ' 
are co-ordinated and controlled by the Intelligence working in 
and through the ' natural mind '. Of course, this Intelligence 
working through the ' natural mind ' is none else but the Purusa 
whose consciousness illuminates and energizes all the vehicles. It 
should also be noted that the ' artificial minds ' act not only as 
nstrume nts of the ' natural ' mind but also, as it were, the outposts 
of its consciousness. Pravrltti includes both kinds of activities, those 
corresponding to Jndnendriyas and Karmendriyas, the receptive and 
operative functions of consciousness. 

Tatra dhyanajam anasayam. 

?ra" of them SJTR^PT born of meditation arfTTSPTq - f ree from 
Samskaras or impressions; germless. 

6. Of these the mind born of meditation is free 
from impressions. 

To all outer appearances the ' artificial minds ' are exact 
replicas of the ' natural mind ' but they differ from it in one 



KAIVALYA PADA 



391 



fundamental respect. They do not carry with them any impres- 
sions, Samskaras or Karmas which are an integral part of the 

* natural mind '. The ' natural mind ' is the product of evolutionary 
growth and is the repository of the Samskaras of all the experiences 
which it has passed through during the course of successive lives. 
These Samskaras in their totality are referred to as Karmasaya ' the 
vehicle of Karmas' and have been dealt with in 11-12. The 

* artificial minds ' created by the will-power of the Yogi are free 
from these impressions and one can easily see why this should be 
so. They are merely temporary creations which disappear as 
soon as the work for which they are created is finished. A busi- 
ness firm may be obliged to open a temporary branch in some 
locality for a particular purpose. Although business is transacted 
at the office of the new branch all accounts etc. are kept at the 
head office. The temporary office is merely an outpost of the 
head office and has really no independent status. The assets and 
liabilities belong to the head office. A somewhat similar relation- 
ship exists between the ' artificial minds ' and the one ' natural 
mind '. < 

vs. **j?j«4^i*wi 41PnR<afa«f*kK*ii'^ i 

Karmasuklakrsnam yoginas tri-vidham 
itaresam. 

3HT action 3TSTW not white srereupr not black iflpM: of a 
Yogi fkfWT threefold l^fFT of others. 

7. Karmas are neither white nor black (neither 
good nor bad) in the case of Togis, they are of three 
kinds in the case of others. 



The next topic which Patanjali takes up is the question of 
gaining freedom from the bondage of Karma which is a sine qua non 
for the attainment of Kaivalya. The subject of Karma has already 
been dealt with in 11-12-14 and is taken up again here. In 
Section II the problem was discussed from a different angle — in 



392 



SECTION IV (7) 



relation to Kles'as — and it was shown how the Kles'as are the 
underlying cause of Karmas which in their turn produce pleasant 
or unpleasant conditions in this or future lives according as they 
are good or bad. But here, in Section IV, the subject has been 
taken up again and is dealt with from an entirely different point 
of view — with the object of showing how the Togi may get rid of 
the Karmdsaya — the vehicle ,of Karma — which contains the accu- 
mulated Samsakaras of all the previous lives and which binds the 
soul to the wheel of birth and death. Unless and until all these 
Samskaras are destroyed or rendered inoperative no freedom from 
the bondage of Prakfti is possible even though the Togi may have 
reached an advanced state of illumination. The force of his 
Samskaras will pull him back again and again and prevent him 
from reaching the ultimate goal. 

IV-7 gives a classification of Karma as well as indicates the 
means of avoiding the formation of new Karma. Karmas are 
neither black nor white in the case of those who are Togis; they 
are of three kinds in the case of ordinary people. Black and 
white obviously describe the two kinds of Karmas which produce 
painful and pleasurable fruits referred to in 11-14. The third 
kind of Karmas are those which are of mixed character. For 
example, many actions which we do have different effects upon 
different people. They benefit some and harm others and conse- 
quently produce Karmas of mixed character. 

The word Togi in this Sutra means not only one who is practising 
Toga but also one who has learnt the technique of Niskama Karma. 
He does all his actions in a state of at-one-ment with Isvara and 
does not, therefore, produce any personal Karma. The theory of 
Niskama Karma is an integral part of Hindu philosophical thought 
and is well known to all students of Toga. It is not, therefore, 
necessary to discuss it here in detail, but the broad central idea 
underlying it may be given. According to this doctrine personal 
Karma results from the performance of an ordinary action because 
the guiding force or motive of the action is personal desire — Kama. 
We do our actions identifying ourselves with our ego who seeks 
the fulfilment of his own desires and naturally reaps the fruits in 
the form of pleasurable and painful experiences. When an in- 
dividual can dissociate himself completely from his ego and 



KA1VALYA PADA 



393 



performs action in complete identification with the Supreme Spirit which 
is working through his ego, such an action is called Niskama (with- 
out desire). It does not naturally produce any personal Karma 
and consequently d.oes not bring any fruit to the individual. 

It is necessary to note, however, that it is conscious and 
effective dissociation from the ego which neutralizes the operation 
of the law of Karma and not a mere thought or intention or wish 
on the part of the individual. So real Niskama Karma is possible 
only to highly advanced Togis who have risen above the plane of 
desires. Many well-meaning people trying to lead the religious 
life imagine that merely by wishing to be desireless or thinking of 
dissociating themselves from their ego, superficially dedicating 
their actions to God, will free them from the binding action of 
Karma. This is a mistake though it is true that persistent efforts 
of this kind will naturally pave the way for acquiring the right 
technique. As well may a person hope to free himself from the 
law of gravitation by thinking of rising in the air. What is needed, 
as has been pointed out above, is a real, conscious identification 
with the Divine within us and freedom from, any taint of personal 
motive. To the extent that the action is so tainted will it produce 
Kdrmic effect with its binding power over the individuals 

When the technique of Niskama Karma has been learnt and 
applied to all actions, no personal Karma is incurred by the Togi 
even though he may be busily engaged in the affairs of the world 
as an agent of the Divine Life within him. All his Karmas are 
' consumed in the fire of Wisd.om ' in the words of the Bkagavad- 
Gitd. But what about the Karmas that he has already accumu- 
lated in his present and past lives? He ceases to add any new 
Samskaras to the accumulated stock, but an enormous number of 
Samskaras are already there in his Karmdsaya which must be 
exhausted before Liberation is attained. He cannot, simply by 
willing, make these Samskaras disappear. He must wait patiently 
till they have been completely exhausted and he has paid up the: 
last pie of his debt. It is, therefore, natural that the exhaustion 
of his Karmas which bind him to other souls should be a long 
drawn-out process extending probably over many lives. It is true 
that he has been paying heavy instalments of his Karmic debts 
since he has- taken to the path of Toga. It is also true that as he 



394 



SECTION IV (7, 8) 



i'* 



KAIVALYA PADA 



395 



advances on the path of Yoga and is able to function on the 
higher planes new powers come to him which enable him to 
expedite this process. For example, he can make ' artificial 
minds ' and ' artificial bodies ' {Nirmdnakayds) and through them 
pay off simultaneously his debts to people who are scattered far 
and wide in time and space. Still, with these new powers and 
facilities for hastening the Kdrmic process at his disposal he is 
bound by the laws of Prakrti and has to work within the frame- 
work of these laws. And this naturally requires time and wise 
and careful adaptation of means to ends. 

Tatas tad-vipakanugunanam evabhi- 
vyaktir vasananam. 

cRT: thence cR-fani^ their ripening; fruition 3PT*rTr?TTiT 
accordant; correspondent; favourable rr^ only arPr^pRT: mani- 
festation ^TSPTFTm; of potential desires; of tendencies. 

8. From these only those tendencies are mani- 
fested for which the conditions are favourable. 

What has been said above about the nature of Miskdma, Karma 
must have brought home to the student that it is desire or personal 
attachment which is the motive power of action in the case of 
ordinary people and which produces the Samskaras both in the 
form of tendencies and potentialities as well as Karmas which bring 
pleasant or painful experiences. 

The forces set in motion by our thoughts, desires and actions 
are of a complex nature and produce all kinds of effects which it is 
difficult to classify completely. But all these leave some kind of 
Samskara or impression which binds us in one way or another for 
the future. Thus our desires produce potential energy which 
draws us irresistably to the environment cr conditions in which 
they can be satisfied. Actions produce tendencies which make it 
easier for us to repeat similar actions in future and if they are 



repeated a sufficient number of times may form fixed habits. In 
addition, if our actions affect other people in some way they bind 
us to those people by Kdrmic ties and bring pleasant or unpleasant 
experiences to ourselves. Our thoughts also produce Samskdrat 
and result in desires and actions in accordance with their nature. 

If, however, we analyse theSe different kinds of mental and 
physical activities we shall find that at their base there are always 
desires of one kind or another which drive the mind and result in 
these thoughts and actions. Desire in its most comprehensive 
sense is thus a more fundamental factor in our life than our 
thoughts and actions because it is the hidden power which drives 
the mind and body in all kinds of ways for the satisfaction of its 
own purposes. The mind is thus mostly an instrument of 
desires and its incessant activity results from the continuous pres- 
sure of these desires upon it. Of course, ' desire ' is not an apt 
word for the subtle power which drives the mind at its higher 
levels and which binds consciousness to the glorious realities of 
the spiritual planes. The word used in Samskrta for this power 
which works at all levels, of the mind is Vdsand. Just as Citta is 
the universal medium for the expression of the mind principle, so 
Vdsand is the universal power which drives the mind and produces 
the continuous series of its transformations which imprison consci- 
ousness. In fact, the word Vdsand used in the present context is 
of a still more comprehensive significance, for it not only indicates 
the principle of desire in its widest sense but also the tendencies 
and Karmas which this principle generates on the different planes. 
For desire and the Karmas or tendencies which it produces form 
a vicious circle in which causes and effects are intertwined and it 
is difficult to separate them. So the use of the word Vdsand for 
both is quite justifiable. 

Since different types of Vdsands require different kinds of 
conditions and environment for their manifestation it is quite 
obvious that they cannot find expression in any haphazard manner 
but must follow a certain sequence determined by the different 
types of environments and conditions through which the individual 
passes in the successive incarnations. And this is what IV-8 points 
out. If a person has a strong desire for being a champion athlete 
"when he has inherited a weak and diseased body his desire cannot 



396 



SECTION IV (8, 9) 



I 

r 



KAIVALYA PADA 



397 



naturally be fulfilled in that life. If an individual A has strong 
Karmic ties with another individual B who is not in incarnation at 
the time and those ties require physical expression they will 
naturally remain in abeyance for the time being and can be 
worked out only when both are present in physical incarnation 
at the same time. It will be seen, therefore, that only a limited 
number of Vasanas, whether in the form of desire or Karmas, can 
find expression in a particular incarnation, firstly, because the span 
of human life is more or less limited, and secondly, because the 
conditions for the expression of different kinds of Vasanas are 
frequently incompatible. That portion of the accumulated stock 
of Vasanas {Sancita Karma) which can find expression and is ready 
to be precipitated in one particular incarnation is known as 
Prarabdha Karma of the individual. The life of an ordinary indi- 
vidual is confined within the framework thus made for him and 
his freedom to alter its main trends is extremely limited. But a 
man of exceptionally strong will, and especially a Yogi whose 
knowledge and powers are extraordinary, can make considerable 
changes in the plan of life thus marked out for him. In fact, the 
more the Yogi advances on the path of Yoga which he is treading 
the greater is his hand in determining the pattern of his lives, and 
when he is on the threshold of Kaivalya he is practically the master 
of his destiny. 

In spite of the comprehensive sense in which the word Vdsana 
is used it should be noted that emphasis in this Sutra is on that 
aspect of Vdsana which is expressed in the form of tendencies of 
which Karmas are merely secondary effects. 

Jati-desa-kala-vyavahitanam apy anantar- 
yam smrti-samskarayor ekarupatvat. 
^T% (by) class ^5T (by) locality ^TW (by) time oqcifedHI^ 
separated; divided 3rfq- even 3iM^4K sequence; non-interruption; 
immediate succession FTfo-HFPRJft: of memory and impressions 
H^f^qid because of the sameness in appearance or form. 



9. There is the relation of cause and effect even 
though separated by class, locality and time because 
memory and impressions are the same in form. 

The seemingly irrational and disjointed manner in which 
Vasanas have to work out in the successive incarnations may give 
rise to a philosophical difficulty in the mind of the student and 
Patanjali proceeds to remove this difficulty in this Sutra. It 
happens very frequently that one personality of an individual 
does some particular action but because the Karma of that action 
cannot be worked out by that personality owing to the absence of 
the necessary conditions, it has to be worked out by another per- 
sonality of the same individual in a later life. And this second 
personality has no memory of the particular action for which it is 
undergoing that experience. Of course, if this experience is 
pleasurable no question arises in the mind of the second personal- 
ity as to the justice of the undeserved good luck. But if the 
experience is painful there is felt a grievance against Fate 
for the undeserved pain or suffering. A tremendous amount of 
this kind of resentment against ' undeserved ' suffering poisons the 
minds of people who are ignorant of the Law of Karma and its 
mode of working and a wider understanding of this Law will do 
much to make people see things in their true light and to take the 
experiences of life as they come with patience and without 
bitterness. 

Coming back to the philosophical difficulty we may ask: 
' Why should the second personality in the later life suffer for 
the wrongs done by the first personality in the previous lifei, and 
if it has to, how can the law of Karma be called just? ' The answer 
to the question is given in the Sutra we are dealing with. Of 
course, in expounding a philosophical system or scientific technique 
in the Sutra form much is left to the intelligence of the student 
who is supposed to be familiar with the general doctrines upon 
which the philosophy or science is based. Only the essential 
ideas which form, as it were, the steel frame of the mental 
structure are given and even these are stated as concisely as pos- 
sible. The doctrine of reincarnation which is an integral part of 



398 



SECTION IV (9) 



Togic philosophy and which is taken for granted by PatanjalL 
implies that the chain of personalities in the successive incarna- 
tions are temporary expressions of a higher and more permanent 
entity who is called by different names in different schools of 
thought such as the Jivatmd or the Immortal Ego or the individ- 
uality. It is this Jivatmd who really incarnates in the different 
personalities and the latter may be considered to be more or less 
outposts of his consciousness in the lower worlds during the period 
of the incarnations. 

Now, the important point to note here is that the over-all 
memory embracing all the successive lives resides in the ' mind ' of 
the Jivatmd and the different personalities which succeed one an- 
other do not share the over-all continuous memory. Their memory 
is confined only to the particular experiences gone through by 
them in each separate incarnation. This continuous memory 
embracing the chain of lives is due to the fact that the Samskdras 
of all the experiences gone through in these lives are present in 
the permanent higher vehicles of the Jivatmd. Just as the contact 
of the needle with the impressions on the gramophone record 
reproduces sound, just as the contact of the mind with the physi- 
cal brain reproduces memory of experiences gone through in this 
life, in the same way, the contact of the higher consciousness with 
the Samskdras or impressions in the higher vehicles of the Jivatmd 
reproduces memories corresponding to the Samskdras contacted. 
The vehicle which is the repository of all these Samskdras is called 
' Kdrana Sarira ' in Veddntic terminology because it is the repository 
of all the germs of future experiences. 

It will be seen from what has been said above how the 
experiences and the corresponding memories of the different per- 
sonalities scattered in different conditions of class, time and space 
are integrated in the consciousness of the Jivatmd who has passed, 
through all the experiences and is the real sower and reaper of 
the Karmas accruing from them. Seen in this light, reaping the 
bitter fruits by a personality for the wrongs done by another 
personality which has gone before does not involve any injustice 
because the different personalities are expressions, under different 
conditions, of the same entity though they may not be aware of 
the fact in their physical consciousness. A particular personality 



KAIVALYA PADA 



399 



[Jiva) is not aware of the whole series of experiences and Samskdras 
but the Jivatmd is, and in the long uninterrupted series of actions 
and reactions sees the natural working out of the law of Karma 
and no favouritism or injustice whatsoever. We do not grumble 
when we find that the unpleasant experiences which we have to 
go through are the direct result of our own folly or wrong-doing. 
And neither does the Jivatmd before whose vision all the past lives 
lie like an open book. 

The manner in which the over-all memory of the Jivatmd 
enables him to see the perfect working out of causes and effects 
even though they are scattered over different lives in an irregular 
manner can be illustrated by a simple diagram given below: 




Fig. 12 

a b, c, d etc. represent the different causes set going by a partic- 
ular' Jivatmd in four lives represented by compartments A, B, G 
and D and a' b' c' d' etc. the corresponding Kdrmic effects which 
ensue in the same or a subsequent life. If these letters are distri- 
buted in the four separate compartments in an irregular manner 
only keeping in mind that each effect follows its corresponding 



400 



SECTION IV (9, 10) 



cause then it will not be possible for anyone whose vision is con- 
fined to only one compartment to correlate all the causes and the 
effects which are precipitated when the appropriate conditions 
present themselves either in the same life or in subsequent lives. 
But if anyone looks at the letters from a distance so that all the 
letters in the different compartments are visible simultaneously 
then every effect can be traced to its corresponding cause, and in 
spite of the irregular mixing up of the causes and effects in the 
different compartments, the law of cause and effect is seen to be 
strictly obeyed. 

Tasam anaditvam casiso nityatvat. 

cimm of tHem dMlfcrt^ no beginning ^ and; also anpim : 
of the (current of) desire or will to live fac^ld because of the 
eternity or permanence. 

10. And there is no beginning of them, the desire 
to live being eternal. 

We have seen in the previous Sutra that human life is a 
continuous series of experiences brought about by setting in motion 
certain causes which are followed sooner or later by their corres- 
ponding effects, the whole process thus being an uninterrupted 
play of actions and reactions. The question naturally arises: 
'When and how does this process of accumulating Samskdras 
begin and how can it be ended? ' We are bound to the wheel 
of births and deaths on account of Vasanas which result in 
experiences of various kinds : and these in their turn generate more 
Vasanas. We seem to be facing one of those philosophical riddles 
which seem to defy solution. The answer given by Patafijali 
to the first part of the question posed above is that this process of 
accumulating Samskdras cannot be traced to its source because the 
twill to live ' or the ' desire to be"' does not come into play with 
the birth of the human soul but is characteristic of all forms of 



KAIVALYA PADA 



401 



life through which consciousness has evolved in reaching the 
human stage. In fact, the moment consciousness comes into 
contact with matter with the birth of Avidyd and the Klesas begin 
to work, Samskdras begin to form. Attractions and repulsions 
of various degrees and kinds are present even in the earliest stages 
of evolution — mineral, vegetable and animal — and an individual 
who attains the human stage after passing through all the previous 
stages brings with him all the Samskdras of the stages through 
which he has passed, though most of these Samskdras lie dormant 
in a latent condition. Animal traits are recognized even by 
Western psychology as present in our sub-conscious mind, and the 
occasional emergence of these traits belonging to the lower stages 
is due to the presence within us of all the Samskdras which we have 
gathered in our evolutionary development. That is why, as soon 
as the control of the Higher Self temporarily disappears or slackens 
owing to heigehtned emotional disturbances or other causes, 
human beings begin to behave like beasts or even worse than 
beasts. That, incidentally, shows the necessity of keeping a rigid 
control over our mind and emotions because once this is com- 
pletely lost there is no knowing what undesirable Samskdras which 
have been lying dormant through the ages may become active 
and make us do things for which we may have to repent after- 
wards. History provides many instances of the recrudescence of 
such traits in human beings and the temporary reversion to the 
-animal stage. It is true that the human, animal, vegetable and 
mineral kingdoms are clearly defined and are separate stages of 
evolution and there can be no retrogression, from one kingdom 
to another, but as far as Samskdras are concerned they may be 
considered to be continuous and the human stage may be consi- 
dered as the summation and culmination of the previous stages. 

As evolution progresses, Vasanas become more and more 
complicated and in the human stage assume a bewildering variety 
and complexity owing to the introduction of the mental element. 
The intellect, though it is the servant and instrument of desire to 
a certain extent, plays in its turn an important part in the growth 
of the desire nature and the highly complicated and various desires 
of the modern civilized man bear an interesting contrast to the 
comparatively simple and natural desires of the primitive man. 
26- 



402 



SECTION IV (10, 11) 



As evolution progresses still further and with the practice of Toga 
subtler levels of consciousness are contacted, desires become more 
and more refined and subtle and thus more difficult to detect and 
transcend. But even the subtlest and most refined desire which 
binds consciousness to the bliss and knowledge of the highest 
spiritual planes differs only in degree and is really a refined form 
of the primary desire — c will to live ' which is called AJisaht. It 
will be seen that it is not possible to destroy Vdsanas and thus put 
an end to the life process by tackling them on their own plane. 
Even Niskdma Karma when practised perfectly can only stop 
generating new personal Karma for the future. It cannot destroy 
the root of Vdsand which is inherent in manifested life. As Viveka 
and Vairdgya develop, the active Vdsanas become more and more 
quiescent but their Samskdras remain and like seeds can burst forth 
into active form whenever favourable conditions present them- 
selves and appropriate stimuli are applied to the mind. 

Hetu-phalasrayalambanaih samgrhitatvad 
esam abhave tad-abhavah. 

^5 (with) cause q^T effect 3TPSPT substratum; that which 
gives support 3)MM«H: object *f^d<tfld because of being bound, 
together i^H of these 3r*rr% on the disappearance cT^-anfrRT: 
disappearance of them. 

11. Being bound together as cause-effect, substra- 
tum-object, they (effects, i.e. Vdsanas) disappear on their 
(cause, i.e. Avidya) disappearance. 

If the Vdsanas form a continuous stream, and no release from 
bondage is possible without their destruction how can Liberation 
be attained? The answer to this question was given in the theory 
of Kleins which has been dealt with already in Section II. We 
saw that the cyclic progress of manifested life for the Purusa begins 



KA1VALYA PADA 



403 



with the association of his consciousness with Prakrti through the 
direct agency of Avidya. Avidya leads successively to Asmitd, 
Rdga-Dvesa and Abhinivesa and all the miseries of life in bondage. 

If Avidya is the ultimate cause of bondage and the whole 
process of the continuous generation of Vdsanas rests oil this basis 
it follows logically that the only effective means of attaining, 
freedom from bondage is to destroy Avidya. All other means of 
ending the miseries and illusions of life which do not completely 
destroy Avidya can, at best, be palliatives and cannot lead to the 
goal of Togic endea.vo\ir-^-Kaivalya. How this Avidya can be des- 
troyed has been discussed very thoroughly and systematically in 
Section II and it is not necessary to deal with this question here. 

Atitanagatam svarupato 'sty adhva-bhedad 
dharmanam. 



arafcr the past 3HMd the future fcl^d: in reality; in its 
own form 3ff^f exists 3p>ej*KM because of the difference of paths 
y^fylH of properties. 

12. The past and the future exist in their own 
(real) form. The difference of Dharmas or properties- 
is on account of the difference of paths. 

This is one of the most important and interesting Sutras in 
Section IV because it throws light on a fundamental problem of 
philosophy. That there is a Reality underlying the phenomenal 
world in which we live our life is taken for granted in all schools of 
Yoga, the aim of Toga, in fact, being the search for and discovery 
of this Reality. The question arises : ' Is this world of Reality 
absolutely independent of the phenomenal world in time and 
space which we contact with our mind or are the two worlds 
related to each other in some way?' According to the Great 
Teachers who have found the Truth the two worlds are related 



404 



SECTION IV (12) 



though it is difficult for the intellect to comprehend this relation- 
ship. If there is a relation existing between the two worlds we 
may further enquire whether the manifested worlds in time and 
space rigidly express a predetermined pattern of Divine Thought, 
just as a picture on a cinema screen is the result of a mechanical 
projection of the photographs in the film roll. Or does the 
procession of events in the phenomenal worldr merely conform to 
a Plan which exists in the Divine Mind in the same way as the 
construction of a building follows the plan of the architect? The 
first view will imply Determinism in its most rigid form while the 
second will leave some room for Free Will. 

The Sutra under discussion throws some light on this philoso- 
phical problem. It is composed of two separate parts, the second 
part amplifying the first. The statement ' the past and future 
exist in their own form' means obviously that the succession of 
phenomena which constitute the world process or any part of it 
are the expression, in terms of time, of some reality which exists in 
the subtler realms of consciousness beyond the range of the human 
intellect. This reality transcends time and yet expresses itself as 
time in the world process. 

As this question of time will be dealt with thoroughly in 
connection with IV-33 let us pass on and proceed to consider the 
second part of the Sutra with which we are immediately concerned 
at this stage. ' The difference of Dharmas is on account of the 
difference of paths.' This is apparently an abstruse statement 
Which does not seem to make sense and the existing commentaries 
do not throw any light on it. Let us see whether it is not possible 
to get at the meaning of the author in the light of what has been 
said with regard to the nature of the past and future in the first 
part of the Sutra. 

If the succession of phenomena which we cognize with our 
mind is the expression of some reality and if this expression is not 
a mere mechanical projection implying Determinism in its rigid 
form then it follows logically that the fulfilment of this reality in 
terms of time and space must be possible along a number of paths 
any one of which may be actually followed as a result of all the 
forces working in the realm of Nature. The series of events 
which have taken place already and become the ' past ' represent 



KA1VALYA PADA 



405 



the path trodden by the Chariot of Time so far and have iecome 
fixed — part of the memory of Nature in the Akasic records. What 
about the events which are still in the womb of the 'future'? 
What shape are these events going to take in becoming the ' past ' 
in their turn? As these events will not be the result of the working 
out of a rigid inexorable Destiny but elastic adaptations to a 
Divine Pattern the path which they take must be at least to some 
extent indeterminate. There must be a certain amount of latitude 
for movement if there is freedom of choice and free will has any 
place in the scheme of things. Of course, there are forces working 
in the field which, to a certain extent, will determine the direction 
in which events will move. There is, for example, the pressure of 
evolutionary forces. There is the directing force of the Divine 
Plan and archetypes in every sphere of development. There is 
the tremendous pressure of the potential power of the Samskdras 
both in the realm of matter and mind. But within the 
limitations set by these different forces tending to mould the future 
there is, still, a certain freedom of movement which makes it possi- 
ble for the future to develop along one of the many possible lines 
which open out from moment to moment. It is in this way, 
therefore, that in the world of the Relative, influenced by the 
Divine Pattern on the one hand and the momentum of the past 
on the other events move forward towards their final consumma- 
tion. 

Having understood the significance of the phrase ' difference 
of paths ' let us now see how these different paths merely represent 
the emergence of different properties in the substratum, i.e. 
Prakrti. The path taken by the course of events, if we analyse it 
carefully, is nothing else than a particular series of phenomena in 
a particular order, each element of this series, in its turn, being 
nothing more than a particular combination of properties or 
Dharmas which are all inherent in Prakrti. If we represent, for the 
sake of illustration, these different properties by A, B, C,.D, E, F,. 
G, H, I, J, K, L, etc. 



406 



SECTION IV (12) 




Fig. 13 

then different courses of events may be represented by different 
series of phenomena in the following manner: 

J. A B 



PATH I K ^^; c 

M 

1 



u m' l 



H^ B Z ^ ^ ^ 

j n m F d c e 1 c L yi 



J, A .B 



PATHD k ^^ c 

M 
1 



P *c 



N m' l 



P. E .c 



N. C .E 



^ * "X M X' 

i K H K^N j'^G L^N 



OL K F 



2, 3 

Fig. 14 



J 

5 



It will be noted that each element of this phenomenon is nothing 
but a particular combination of Dharmas which have become 
manifest at a particular moment of time. It does not matter ^ 
whether we consider the phenomena within a limited sphere like 
our Solar system or within the unlimited sphere of the Universe 
for they all take place within the realm of Prakrti. It is thus 



kaivAlya pada 



407 



possible, beginning with a particular situation, to arrive at another 
situation by two or more alternative paths. 

These paths followed by the course of events in the 
phenomenal world are not of purely mechanical origin, as the 
materialists would have us believe. They, in some mysterious 
way, bring about the fulfilment of the Eternal as has been pointed 
out above. The lower phenomenal world does not exist for its 
own sake (being merely a law of mechanical necessity) but for 
the sake of fulfilling the Eternal. Its object is to bring about 
certain ' changes ' in the higher spiritual worlds, these ' changes ' 
being the very object of its existence. The use of the word 
' changes ' in connection with the Eternal is no doubt extremely 
incongruous but the student should understand that it is employed, 
for lack- of a better term, to indicate that subtle and mysterious 
reaction which our life in the phenomenal world has on our eternal 
being. A specific instance will perhaps make the point clear. The 
"unfoldment of the perfection which is latent in every human soul 
is the object of the reincarnations in the lower worlds through 
which it is made to pass. The different kinds of experiences 
through which the soul passes, life after life, stimulate gradually 
its spiritual nature and unfold the perfection which finds its con- 
summation in Kaivalya. Now, the type and number of these 
experiences do not really matter as long as the objective is reached. 
A particular individual may go through a hundred lives of the 
most intense and painful experiences or he may take one thousand 
lives containing experiences of an entirely different nature to attain 
perfection. The path does not matter, it is the attainment of the 
goal which is important. The path lies in the world of phenomena 
which is unreal and illusory while the objective lies in the world 
of the Eternal which is Real. 

It is this possibility of taking different paths that enables the 
Togi to cut short the process of unfoldment in the phenomenal 
worlds and to attain perfection in the shortest possible time. He 
is not bound to go along the long and easy road of evolution which 
humanity as a whole is treading. He can step out of this broad 
-road and take the short and difficult climb to the mountain top 
"by following the path of Toga. But if he is bent on breaking 
through the world of phenomena into the world of Reality he 



408 



SECTION IV (12, 13) 



must first understand the nature of these phenomena and the 
manner in which they are perceived by the mind. 'That is why 
Patanjali has dealt with this question in IV-12. 



T3- 3" «q«M^$Hi: *TU|kHH: I 

Te vyakta-suksmah gunatmanah. 

^ they &Ftt manifest 5JSTT subtle; unmanifest 'PJIkHM: of 
the nature of Gunas. 

13. They, whether manifest or unmanifest, are of 
the nature of Gunas. 

In the last Sutra it was pointed out that all kinds of phenom- 
ena which are the object of perception by the mind are nothing 
but different combinations of Dharmas or properties which are 
inherent in Prakrti. In this Sutra the idea is carried one step 
further and it is pointed out that the Dharmas themselves are 
nothing but different combinations of the three primary Gunas. 
This is a sweeping statement which is likely to startle anyone who 
is not familiar with the theory of Gunas but to one who under- 
stands this theory it will appear as a perfectly logical conclusion 
which flows naturally from that theory. If the three Gunas are the 
three fundamental principles of motion (inertia, mobility, vibra- 
ton) and if motion of some kind or another lies at the basis of 
manifestation of all kinds of properties then these properties must 
be of the nature of Gunas. Physical, chemical and other kinds of 
properties which modern Science has studied so far can be traced 
ultimately to motions and positions of different kinds and so the 
theory that properties are of the nature of Gunas is in accord with 
the latest scientific developments as far as they go. But the 
statement in the Sutra under discussion is of an all-embracing 
character and comprises not only physical properties which we can 
cognize with our physical senses but also subtle properties pertain- 
ing to the subtler worlds. Thoughts, emotions and in fact all 
kinds Of phenomena involving Dharmas. come within its scope. 



KA1VALYA PADA 



409 



The word Suksma means not only properties related to the subtler 
planes but also those which are unmanifest or dormant. The only 
difference between manifest and dormant properties is that while 
the manifest properties are the result of particular combinations of 
Gunas in action the dormant properties are those which exist 
potentially in Prakrti in the form of theoretical combinations of 
Gunas not yet materialized. Thousands of new compounds are 
being produced in the field of chemistry every year. Each of 
these represents a new combination of Gunas which was latent so 
far and has only now become manifest. Prakrti is like an organ 
having the potentiality for producing an innumerable number of 
notes. The manifest qualities are the notes which are struck and 
give their specific sound, the unmanifest qualities are the notes 
which are silent, lying in repose. But they are all there to emerge 
at any moment and play their part in the phenomena which are 
taking place everywhere, all the time. 

The importance of the generalization contained in this Sutra 
thus lies not only in the fact that it goes to the very bedrock in 
revealing the true nature of all kinds of phenomena but also in 
its extraordinary comprehensiveness. No generalization of modern 
Science can perhaps compare in its all-embracing nature with this 
doctrine of Yogic philosophy and as it is based upon a vision of 
the worlds of phenomena from the vantage-ground of Reality 
there is no doubt that the more Science advances into the realms 
of the unknown the more it will corroborate the Yogic doctrine. 

Parinamaikatvad vastu-tattvam. 

mRiiFT transformation; change H+dlcT on account of the 
uniqueness ^^ of the object dr=l^ the essence; reality. 

14. The essence of the object consists in the 
uniqueness of transformation (of the Gunas). 

What is the essential nature of any object or thing which is an 
object of mental perception ? We can know of the existence and. 



410 



SECTION IV (14, 15) 



nature of anything only from the properties which it has at a 
particular moment. There is no other way. This ' bundle of 
properties ' which in their totality constitute the thing must there- 
fore be a unique combination of the three Gunas since each pro- 
perty taken by itself is nothing more than a peculiar combination 
of the Gunas. Anyone with some knowledge of modern Science 
can take up any physical object and break it up into its physical 
and chemical components — into molecules, atoms, electrons, etc. and 
these ultimately resolve into different kinds of forces and motions. 
Nothing material in the usual sense is left over if we take into 
consideration the fact that matter and energy are interconvertible. 
As far as we can see, it is all a play of different kinds of forces and 
motions of extraordinary variety and complexity. It is true we 
do not yet know exactly the nature of the nucleus of the atoms 
but from the trend of researches in this field it is very probable 
that this also will be found to be nothing more than a combination 
of different kinds of motions. So that, as far as it goes, modern 
Science corroborates the truth of the Togic doctrine that every 
object which we perceive with our mind is - merely a unique trans- 
formation of the three Gunas. It should be noted that the clue to 
the meaning of the Sutra lies in the word Ekatoat which does not 
mean here ' oneness ' but c uniqueness '. Interpreted in this way 
the Sutra fits in perfectly in the chain of reasoning adopted by 
Patanjali to explain the theory of mental perception. 

<R. «l*^|«i farl^KM dififa*Hd: <FTT: I 

Vastu-samye citta-bhedat tayor vibhaktah 
panthah. 

=)*tj^l«4 object being the same Rtf'*Kld because of there 
being difference of the mind ttt: of these two fcm=ki: separate 
q^: path; way of being. 

15. The object being the same the difference in 
the two (the object and its cognition) are due to their 
(of the minds) separate path. 



KAIVALYA PADA 



411 



If each object is a unique transformation of the three Gunas 
and has thus a definite identity of its own why then does it appear 
different to different minds? It is a matter of common experience 
that no two minds see the same thing alike. There is always a 
difference in cognition though the thing is the same. The reason 
Tor this difference, as pointed out in this Sutra, lies in the fact that 
the minds which cognize the thing are in different conditions and 
thus naturally get different impressions from the same object. 
When one vibrating body strikes another vibrating body the result 
of the impact depends upon the condition of both the bodies at 
the time of the impact. The mental body which comes in contact 
with the object of perception is not a passive or static thing. It is 
vibrating in all sorts of ways and, therefore, must modify every 
impression received by its own rate of vibration. It is, therefore, 
not possible to obtain a true impression of the object as long as 
the mind itself is not free from its Vrttis. The impression created 
will depend upon the condition of the receiving mind and as all 
minds are in different conditions, because they have followed 
different paths in their evolution, they must get different 
impressions from the same object. The student should keep 
in mind the distinction between the mental body which 
vibrates. and the mind in which the Vrttis are produced by these 
vibrations. 

Is it possible to get a true impression of an object under any 
circumstances? Yes, when the mind has been freed from its Vrttis 
and does not, in consequence, modify the impression made upon it 
by the object. When the Vrttis have been eliminated the mind 
becomes one with the object (1-41), which is another way of saying 
that it receives an exact impression of the object without its own 
modifying influence. So it is only in SamSdki, when all the Vrttis 
have been suppressed, that it is possible to know the object as it 
really is. 

Even in our everyday life we find that the more a mind is 
influenced by different biases, prejudices and other disturbances 
the greater is the distortion produced in the impressions which are 
made upon it by men and things. A calm and dispassionate mind 
can alone see things correctly as far as this is possible under the 
limitations of ordinary life. 



412 SECTION IV (16) 

Na caika-citta-tantram vastu tad-aprama- 
nakam tada kim syat. 

1 not ^" and l^F one f^rT mind d ^A *T dependent on 3T^ 
an object ?RT that 3iMHI u l+H non-cognized; unwitnessed cT^T then- 
f%*T what HI Id would be; would happen to. 

16. Nor is an object dependent on one mind. 
What would become of it when not cognized by that 
mind ? 

If each object o"f mental perception is a mere bundle of 
properties which produce different impressions upon different 
minds, then, mental perception may be considered as a purely 
subjective phenomenon and it may be argued that the object need 
not have an independent existence apart from the cognizing 
agent, i.e., the mind. This purely idealistic- theory of philosophy 
is disposed of by the objection raised in this Sutra. If the object 
of mental perception is only a product of the mind which perceives 
it and has no independent existence of its own, then, what becomes 
of the object when the mind ceases to perceive it? If we accept, 
the purely idealistic theory that objects in the external world have 
no real existence of their own but are mere creations of the mind 
then we are led to the absurd conclusion that the external world, 
appears and disappears with the appearance and disappearance 
of objects in the mind of each individual, and it becomes difficult 
to account for the uniformity of experiences of different people 
with regard to different things and the harmonious co-ordination, 
of observations made by different individuals. 

No .useful purpose will be served by going further into the 
implications of this theory. It is enough to note that Patafijali; 
does not accept it. The Togic philosophy recognizes the existence 
of objects ' outside the mind. It is these objects which stimulate 
the mind in particular ways and produce impressions which are 
then perceived by the Purufa. It is true that the objects which 



KAIVALYA PADA 



413 



produce the impressions are considered to be mere combinations 
of Gunas. It is also true that the mind perceives not the objects 
themselves but the impressions made by them upon it. But still, 
there is something external to the mind which stimulates the mind 
to form images whatever its nature may be. It will be seen, there- 
fore, that the theory of mental perception upon which the Togic 
philosophy is based steers a middle course between pure idealism 
and pure realism and reconciles in a harmonious conception the 
essential features of both. The main postulates of the theory are 
given in the next few Sutras. 

TV9. d£H<MiQfek<=nF<HTiHi ^^ WTcrmTcPT i 

Tad uparagapeksitvac cittasya vastu 
jnatajfiatam. 

<K-^M<M the colouring thereby 3jttfs^RT because of needing 
'farTC5T for the mind; by the mind 3^5 an object m^ known 
3T5TRPT unknown. 



17. In consequence of the mind being coloured 
or not coloured by it, an object is known or unknown. 

The first essential for the mind of an individual ' knowing ' an 
object is that the object should affect or modify the mind in some 
way. The phrase actually used is ' colouring the mind '. The 
use of the word ' colouring ' for ' modifying ' is not merely a poetic 
way of stating a scientific fact. It is used with a definite purpose 
in view. The word ' modification ' would merely imply a partial 
change in the mind while the idea which has to be conveyed is a 
change which may vary in intensity from a mere trace to a depth 
of any intensity. The knowledge of the object may be extremely 
superficial or very deep and all these progressively increasing 
degrees of understanding can best be conveyed by using the word 
* colouring ', the depth of the colour indicating the degree of 
assimilation of the object by the mind. Besides, it is only by the 
use of the word ' colouring ' that the complete fusion of the 



414 



SECTION IV (17, 18) 



object and the mind referred to in Svtra 1-41 can be properly 
^understood. 

Those who have ever tried to study a subject which is entirely- 
new tq them and much beyond their mer. tal capacity will be able 
to form some idea regarding the necessity of an object ' colouring * 
the mind before it can be understood. The subject is not assimi- 
lated by the mind at all, simply refuses to sir.k into the mird as a 
dye sometimes refuses to stain a tissue. The mind must ' take in ' 
the object to a certain extent at least if it is to ' know ' it and the 
extent to which it assimilates the object determines the degree of 
knowledge. This ' colouring ' of the mird by an external object 
is found on deeper analysis to be nothing more than the capacity 
of the mental vehicle to vibrate in response to the stimulus pro- 
vided by the object. The more fully the vehicle can vibrate in 
this manner the greater is the knowledge of the object which the 
mind acquires. Herein comes the necessity of evolution of the 
vehicles in the earlier stages. 

Sada jnatas citta-vrttayas tat-prabhoh 
purus asyaparin amitva t. 

*KT always sTRTT: (are) known fa-cHrl^: the modifications of 
the mind cRT-SHTt: of its lord 4,*>qw of the Purusa 3 mf<u||fa^ l d 
on account of the changelessness or constancy. 

18. The modifications of the mind are always 
known to its lord on account of the changelessness or 
the Purusa. 

As soon as an object colours the mind the modification is at 
once witnessed by the Purusa and it is this witnessing by the 
Purusa which brings about the ' knowing ' of the object. The use 
of the word ' witness ' for the reaction of the Purusa to the modifi- 
cations taking place in the mind is not appropriate but is resorted 
to in order to distinguish it from the simultaneous mental process 



KAIVALYA PADA 



415 



which is generally called perception. All our words such as 
' knowing ', ' perceiving ' are so closely identified with the activities 
of the mind that a new word is really needed to indicate this 
peculiar ultimate reaction of the Purusa to all mental processes. But, 
in the absence of such a word in the English language ' witnessing ' 
will perhaps do for the present, provided we keep in mind its 
special significance. This ' witnessing ' by the Purusa of the modifi- 
cation produced in the mind is the second indispensable condition of 
' knowing ' any object by the mind, the first being its ' colouring ' 
by the object. Researches in psychology have shown that the 
mind is frequently moidfied by external objects even though it is 
not aware of them at the time, the proof of such modifications 
having taken place lying in the fact that such impressions can be 
recovered later from the mind by hypnotizing the person. So 
that, the c witnessing ' by the Purusa of the modifications produced 
in the mind is independent of the conscious activity of the mind. 
This is the significance of the word Sada which means literally 
c always ' or ' ever '. What is meant to be conveyed in the Sutra is 
that the Purusa is aware, in an unbroken manner, of all the changes 
which are taking place in the mind and it is not possible for any 
change to escape his notice. This is so because he is eternal. It 
is only a changeless, eternal consciousness which can provide such 
a constant and perfect background for the continuous and complex 
changes which are taking place in the mind. If the background 
itself is changeable there is bound to be confusion. You cannot 
project a cinema picture on a screen which itself is changing 
constantly. 

Another point to note is that the Purusa should not only 
provide a constant background for the modifications of the mind 
but that his consciousness should be the ultimate background in 
order that he may be able to notice modifications in the mind at 
all its levels. When the Togi passes into Samadhi and dives into 
the deeper levels of the mind he is not conscious of any break in 
his experiences. The new consciousness which emerges at each 
level seems to take in, understand and co-ordinate experiences of 
all the previous stages and, therefore, there must really be the same 
consciousness illuminating the Citta at all these different levels. 1 1 
is not only our ordinary experiences at the level of the concrete 



416 



SECTION IV (18, 19) 



mind of which this ultimate consciousness is constantly aware but 
also all the supra-mental experiences through which the Togi 

passes in Samadhi. / 

The extraordinary comprehensiveness which characterizes 
consciousness of the Purusa in the ultimate background, is, of course, 
due to the fact that it is eternal, beyond time and space, and 
contains simultaneously within itself everything that can ever 
manifest in the realms of time and space. It is only white light 
which is a harmonious synthesis of all possible colours which can 
be used in the projection of a coloured film on a cinematographic 
screen. Coloured light which is incomplete cannot be used for 
such a purpose. 

Na tat svabhasam drsyatvat. 

^ not <RT it WMWH self-illuminative fW^ld, because of its 
knowability or perceptibility. 

19. Nor is it self-illuminative, for it is perceptible. 

After stating in IV-18 that the Purusa is the sole eternal 
witness of all modifications in the mind at whatever level they 
may take place, Patanjali proceeds to substantiate this statement 
by a chain of reasoning developed in the next four Sutras. 

The first link in this chain is that the mind is nOt self-illumi- 
native, i.e. capable of perceiving by its own power, because it is 
itself perceptible. It is not like the Sun which shines by its own 
light but like the moon which shines by the light of another 
heavenly body. The fact that the mind is perceptible follows 
from our ordinary experience of being able to watch its activities 
and modifications whenever we want to do so. It is true that 
when our attention is directed outwards we are not conscious of 
the changes which are taking place in our mind, but we can at 
any moment direct our attention inwards and observe these 
changes. 



KAIVALYA PADA 



417 



This fact of the mind being perceptible and performing its 
function of perception through the agency of some other power is 
brought home to the Togi more vividly in Samadhi when he tran- 
scends different levels of the mind one after another. At each 
critical stage of this process of diving inwards towards the centre 
of his being, as he leaves one level of the mind for another, the 
perceiver seems to become the perceived. This continuous shifting 
of the boundary between the subjective and the objective proves 
to the Togi that not only the lower concrete mind but even its 
subtlest grades are mere mechanisms of perception. The source 
of illuminating power of consciousness is somewhere else — in 
the Purusa. 

Eka-samaye cobhayanavadharanam. 

iT5f^PT# at the same time; simultaneously ^ and 3^T both 
(opposite sides) 3F^nT"Pr absence of cognizing; non-compre- 
hending. 

20. Moreover, it is impossible for it to be of 
both ways (as perceiver and perceived) at the same time. 

The fact that the mind is perceptible is a matter of experience. 
Now, if the mind is perceptible it cannot at the same time be the 
perceiver. The same thing cannot be the perceiver and the 
perceived. If the mind is perceptible it follows that there must 
be a power, of the nature of consciousness, which enables the mind 
to perform its functions of perception. Since the mind seems to 
perform its function of perception through the power of conscious- 
ness it cannot perceive consciousness itself, or to put it in other 
words, consciousness cannot be the object of perception by the 
mind. That is why it is impossible for us to know what con- 
sciousness is in itself as long as we are within the realms of the 
mind. As long as the cognitive aspect of consciousness acts through 
the medium of the mind it is turned outwards, as it were, and 
27 



418 



SECTION IV (20, 21) 



cognizes other things in the realm of the mind. It is only when 
it is released from the bondage of the mind and turns inwards 
upon itself that it can cognize itself, as explained in IV-22. 

Cittantara-drsye buddhi-buddher ati- 
prasangah smrti-samkara§ ca. 

RxiM<lW ' in (one mind) being cognizable by another, mind 
«rfe^t: cognition of cognitions aiRm*!*: superfluity of proving 
too much; reductio ad absurdum Fjfa of memories SPPT: confusion 
^ and. 

21. If cognition of one mind by another (be 
postulated) we would have to assume cognition of 
cognitions and confusion of memories also. 

Here a philosophical objection may be raised. Instead of 
postulating the existence of the one Purusa whose consciousness 
illuminates the mind at all its levels, we may suppose that each 
individual possesses a number of minds each subtler than the one 
which has been transcended. These different minds instead of 
being illuminated by one source of consciousness may be supposed 
to be independent of each other and the Togi in Samddhi may be 
supposed to be merely passing into the realms of these different in- 
dependent minds one after another. Such a supposition would dis- 
pense with the necessity of postulating the existence of the Purusa 
whose consciousness according to Togic philosophy is the source of 
illumination for all the different grades of mind. But this hypo- 
thesis while doing away with the Purusa will lead us into all kinds 
of intellectual difficulties. For example, if we suppose that there 
are a number of independent minds, each mind perceiving those 
which are denser than itself and being perceived by those which 
are subtler, then there should be a corresponding number of 
Buddhis According to the Togic philosophy the mind is a mere 
instrument and the function of cognition which is a reflection of 



KAIVALYA PADA 



419 



the cognitive aspect of Reality, Citi, is quite different from it though 
necessarily associated with it in all acts of mental perception. It 
follows, therefore, that if there are a number of independent minds 
then there must be a corresponding number of Buddhis also, for 
each mind must have its own separate Buddhi without which it 
cannot function. So, on the basis of this hypothesis, we would 
have not only a number of minds but also a corresponding number 
of Buddhis functioning simultaneously within the same individual 
which will mean cognition of cognition. The phrase Atiprasangak 
means not only ' too many ' but also ' reductio ad absurdum '. So 
both the meanings are applicable to the logical conclusion to which 
we are led from the original supposition. The absurdity lies in 
having to postulate the existence of a number of Buddhic functions 
where only one can exist. Just as the mind integrates the reports 
of the various sense-organs into one harmonized mental conception, 
so our Buddhi is supposed to integrate into one co-ordinated under- 
standing the knowledge received through the different levels of 
the mind and it is impossible, therefore, to conceive that a number 
of Buddhis can function simultaneously within the same individual. 
It is possible to assume multiplicity of instruments for obtaining 
knowledge or experience but no multiplicity can be assumed with 
respect to the agency which co-ordinates and harmonizes all the 
knowledge gathered through different sources or instruments. This, 
by its very nature, must be one, otherwise there is bound to be 
chaos. 

Besides this difficulty, another will be the confusion of 
memories. If there are a number of minds, each with its own set 
of memories, and there are also many independent Buddhis, the 
co-ordinating agency which integrates all these memories into one 
harmonious whole will be absent and the result must be chaos 
within our mind. The most remarkable fact with regard to our 
mind is the existence of perfect co-ordination and harmonization 
in the midst of the most complicated and multifarious mental 
phenomena and experiences. This is especially noticeable in the 
practice of Toga when we dive into the deeper levels of the mind 
and traverse the subtler worlds with all their exquisitely fine and 
extraordinary experiences. It is the Buddhic principle within us 
which enables this co-ordination to be effected and the hypothesis 



420 



SECTION IV (21, 22) 



of many independent minds which requires the elimination of this 
co-ordinating factor has therefore to be rejected. 

^. fed iMPdfl** IH \*4<\+\ i i M-tQ t*««feH<4- 

Citer apratisamkramaya* tad-akarapattau 
sva-buddhi-samvedanam . 

f^: of the consciousness 3|&ll<l*i*HK<i: (ar+Stfa+tf+^O 
of such as does not pass from place to place 3<?-3 n«pp: it s form 
snwt: on the assumption (of) ^fe: self cognition <£<%n«i know- 
ing (of). 

22- Knowledge of its own nature through self- 
cognition (is obtained) when consciousness assumes that 
form in which it does not pass from place to place. 

If cognition takes place through the agency of the mind and 
in the subtlest cognitions pertaining to the deepest levels of the 
mind we can know only the mind thus illuminated by conscious- 
ness, the question naturally arises ' How are we to know conscious- 
ness itself or that light which illuminates the mind at ail its 
levels?' The answer to this important question is given in the 
Satra under discussion, but before we can understand its meanings 
it is necessary to consider carefully the various expressions 
used in it. 

Citefy means ' of consciousness ' and is derived from Citi and 
not Citta which means the mind. ApratisamkramSyah means ' not 
passing from one to another', i.e. not passing from one level of 
Citta to. another or from one vehicle to another. In Samadhi con- 
; sciousness passes from one level of Citta to another and the phrase 
refers to the stage when this process stops or is brought to its 
limit. Tad-akarapattau means ' on the accomplishment or assump- 
tion of its own form'. Consciousness normally functions through 
the mind. This phrase refers to the condition in which it is freed 
from the limitations of the mind and is functioning in its own 
form. Sva-buddhi means Buddhi as it really is and not as it functions 



KAIVALYA PADA 



421 



through the medium of the mind. We know only this function 
of perception as it appears in association with Citta. Sva-buddhi 
is the function of perception as it is when exercised upon itself. 
Samvedanam means 'knowing of. Knowing is really a function 
of consciousness but when exercised through the mind becomes 
knowing something outside or external to pure consciousness. The 
phrase Sva-buddhi-samvedanam therefore means the knowledge which 
results when the faculty of Buddhi is turned upon itself. Normally, 
Buddhi functions through Citta and helps the mind to perceive and 
understand objects in its realm. But when it is freed from the asso- 
ciation of Citta it automatically turns upon itself and illuminates 
its own nature, i.e. consciousness. It is because the power of 
illumination is inherent in it that it illuminates Citta when it 
functions through Citta. If a light is enclosed within a translucent 
globe it reveals the globe. If the globe is removed the light reveals 
itself. From the meanings and explanations of the different 
phrases given above the inner significance of the SUtra should 
now be quite clear. Buddhi, as has been pointed out before, is that 
faculty which enables the mind to perceive and understand objects 
in the phenomenal worlds, the mind being inert and incapable of 
performing this function. As long as Buddhi is functioning 
through the medium of the mind it is not possible to know pure 
consciousness. It is only when it assumes that form in which all 
movement from one level of Citta to another has been eliminated 
that it reveals its real nature. As has been pointed out before, Citta 
or the mind has many levels corresponding to the different vehicles 
of consciousness and in Samadhi consciousness moves up and down 
from one level to another between the centre and periphery. In 
this kind of movement of consciousness there is no movement in 
space but only movement in different dimensions, the centre from 
which consciousness functions always remaining the same. 
When consciousness, in the state of Samadhi, has penetrated into 
the deepest level of Citta and then finally transcended even this 
level it is quite free from the limiting and obscuring action of 
Citta and it is only then that its true nature is realized. In this 
state the perceiver, perceived and perception all merge into one 
Self-illuminated Reality. So the answer to the question ' How 
are we to know consciousness itself? ' is ' By diving in Samadhi 



422 



SECTION IV (22) 



into our consciousness until the mind in its subtlest form is tran- 
scended and the Reality hidden beneath it is revealed '. 

From what has been said above it is apparent that we cannot 
understand the real nature of consciousness by applying the 
ordinary methods of modern psychology. What is known as 
consciousness in terms of modern psychology is only consciousness 
veiled by many layers of the mind, each of which increasingly 
obscures and modifies its nature as it infiltrates into the outermost 
physical mechanism, namely, the human brain. We thus observe 
consciousness in its ordinary manifestations through the physical 
brain under the greatest possible limitations and it is not possible 
to form any idea with regard to its true nature from these ex- 
tremely partial and distorted manifestations. As well might a 
person who had always lived in a dungeon situated in a land, where 
it was perpetually cloudy, try to form an idea regarding the light of 
the Sun from the gloom in which he lived. It will be seen, there- 
fore, that not only is it impossible to know the true nature of 
consciousness by adopting the ordinary means available to the 
modern psychologist but also that the only effective means of 
doing so is to adopt the Togic method. This is a subjective method, 
no doubt, and beyond the capacity of the ordinary man but it is 
the only method available. No amount of dissection of the brain 
and the nervous systems and study of human behaviour can 
unravel for us the mystery of consciousness itself. A great deal of 
research in this field of psychology is being carried on in very 
imposing laboratories in the West, a vast amount of so-called 
scientific data is being accumulated but all this effort is bound to 
prove futile from the very nature of the problem being tackled. 
The modern craze of submitting everything to physical examina- 
tion may succeed with physical things but no physical instruments 
can ever be devised which will reveal the nature of consciousness 
which is of the nature of Spirit. All this waste of effort can be 
avoided and the whole field of modern psychology illuminated in 
the most effective manner if the facts of Togic philosophy are 
properly understood and used in the study of psychological 
problems. 

The student will have noticed that in the ideas set forth in 
the above pages no effort has been made to link up the facts of 



KAIVALYA PADA 



423 



Togic philosophy with doctrines which are considered to be 
religious. But this does not mean that there is no relation between 
them. In fact, a religious man can see, if he studies the subject 
of Toga with an open mind, that all the ideas of Togic philosophy 
can be interpreted in religious terras, and the consciousness which 
the Togi seeks to uncover within the folds of his mind is nothing 
but that Supreme Reality which is commonly referred to as God. 
God is recognized by every religion with any philosophical back- 
ground to be a Mighty Being whose consciousness transcends the 
manifested Universe. He is considered to be hidden within every 
human heart. He is supposed to transcend the mind. Basically, 
these ideas are the same as those of Togic philosophy. Th-c main 
difference lies in the assertion by Togic philosophy that this 
Supreme Reality or Consciousness is not merely a matter for specu- 
lation or even adoration but can be discovered by following a 
technique which is as definite and unfailing as the technique of 
any modern Science. Toga thus imparts a. tremendous signifi- 
cance to religion and places the whole problem of religious life 
and endeavour on an entirely new basis and it is difficult to 
understand how any religious man can reject its claims without 
giving them due consideration. 

Drastr-drsyoparaktam cittam sarvartham. 

S^ the knower ?5T and the knowable or known >d l K t tdH 
coloured (by) ferfj the mind *H?>4*{ all-apprehending; all- 
including. 



23. The mind coloured by the Knower (i.e. 
Purusa) and the Known is all-apprehending. 



the 



This Sutra apparently sums up what has been said about the 
modus operandi of mental perception in the previous Sutras. Its real 
importance will, however, be seen only if we understand the 
significance of the phrase Sarvartham. The mind ,• in or der to know 



424 



SECTION IV (23, 24) 



any object, has to be affected in two ways. Firstly, it must be 
modified or coloured, at least to some extent, by the object which 
is to be known, and secondly, it must be simultaneously illumi- 
nated by the consciousness of the Purusa which is eternally present 
in the ultimate background. Modified in this double manner the 
mind is capable of knowing everything in the phenomenal world, 
using the word ' knowing ' in its most comprehensive sense. The 
significance of the word Sarvdrtham which means literally ' all- 
including ' or ' all-apprehending ' lies in the fact that the word 
Citta does not stand merely for th~ medium through which the 
human intellect finds expression. It stands definitely for the all- 
inclusive medium through which phenomena of every kind, right 
from the physical to the Atmic plane, are perceived. Even th£ 
thinnest veil of ' matter ' which on the Atmic plane obscures the 
consciousness of the Purtifa and involves him in manifestation is 
associated with the finest grade of mind. Citta is thus co-extensive 
with Prakrti and both are transcended simultaneously when Purusa 
attains Self-realization in Kaivalya. 

+ l(Vlld I 

Tad asamkhyeya-vasanabhis citram api 
parartham samhatya-karitvat. 

?TC that 3RfwT innumerable <H*H|Ht: by Vasanas f%WT 
variegated 3rPr although <ROT for the sake of another y^ + l- 
Rc^ld by reason of acting in collaboration or association. 

24. Though variegated by innumerable Vasanas 
it (the mind) acts for another (Purusa) for it acts in 
association. 

This Sutra goes with the preceding one and should be studied 
along with it. Just as Citta is universal and embraces all vehicles 
through which the consciousness of the Purusa functions in the 
manifested worlds, in the same way Vasana is universal in its 
import and is associated with all the vehicles of consciousness 



KAIVALYA PADA 



425 



and grades of Citta. The word Vasana is generally translated by 
the word desire but this is restricting its scope in the same manner 
as when we confine the meaning of the word Citta to that of the 
medium of the intellect. The clinging to the enjoyments of the 
lower worlds binds the soul to these worlds and produces all 
kinds of attachments and consequent suffering. Such clinging is 
generally known as desire or Kama. But this clinging is not 
confined to the lower worlds. In its subtler forms it exists even in 
the higher worlds. In fact, wherever there is Asmitd or identifica- 
tion with a vehicle of consciousness there is clinging to the vehicle, 
however subtle this clinging may be and however spiritual may 
be the object of this clinging. If there were no clinging or 
attachment but perfect Vairagya there would be no bondage but 
Liberation or Kaivalya. It is this clinging to the higher modes 
of existence which constitutes many of the ' fetters ' which have 
to be broken on the path of Liberation. 

It is only when Vasana is understood in this wider sense and 
not only in the sense of desires pertaining to the lower worlds that 
we can grasp the significance of the Sutra under discussion. Vasana 
permeates life at all its levels including the highest. It has for its 
objectives things of the most varied nature, from the crudest 
physical indulgences to the most refined knowledge and bliss of 
the spiritual planes. But when we pursue these multifarious 
objectives — and the nature of the objects we seek continually 
changes as we evolve' — -what are we really seeking ? Are we pursuing 
these objectives for their own sake? No! We are merely seeking 
the Purusa who is our real Self hidden beneath all these attractive 
objects of pursuit. It is for his sake that we are going through 
this long and tedious process of evolution. It is really not for the 
sake of these objects which promise to give us happiness that we 
pursue them but for the sake of someone else {Parartham) and that 
is the Purusa. 

How do we know that it is the Purusa whom we are seeking 
in all these multifarious objectives? Because while the objectives 
keep changing all the time and never satisfy us he always remains 
in the background. He is the common factor in all our efforts to 
find happiness through ever-changing forms and, therefore, he 
must be the real object of our search. Simple reasoning, is it not? 



426 



SECTION IV (24, 25) 



He is thus not only the constant background of consciousness 
(IV-18) which illuminates the mind in all its activities but also 
the hidden drawing force of desire in all its forms and phases. 

One important consequence of the Purusa being the ultimate 
goal amidst all the changing objectives which we pursue is that no 
condition of existence attained by the Yogi, however exalted it 
may be, can give him abiding peace. The Divine urge within 
him will, sooner or later, assert itself and make him dissatisfied with 
the condition he has attained, until he has found the Purusa in 
Self-realization. For the consciousness of the Purusa alone "is 
Self-sufficient, Self-contained and Self-illuminated and until this 
is attained there can be no real security, no real freedom and no 
abiding peace. 



Visesa-darSina atma-bhava-bhavana- 
yinivrttih. 

(Wm the distinction <HlH: of him who sees 3(lc*WH con- 
sciousness of th& Atmic plane ^imi dwelling in or upon (in mind) ; 
reflection fafaqfri: complete cessation (because of satisfaction). 
[Some editions read faclfrl:.] 

25. The cessation (of desire) for dwelling in the 
consciousness of Atma for one who has seen the 
distinction. 

When this fact is realized even the subtle Vasana which binds 
the Yogi to the transcendent bliss and spiritual illumination of the 
Atmic plane ceases and he bends all his energies to tear down the 
last and the finest veil which hides the face of the Beloved. The 
distinction indicated by Vises a has already been discussed in the 
previous Sutra. It is the distinction between our true objective 
which is Self-realization and the innumerable and ever-changing 
objectives which we pursue in our search for happiness. The 



KA1VALYA PADA 



427 



phrase Atma-Bhava is used for the exalted consciousness functioning 
on the Atmic level — the last stage before Kaivalya is attained. The 
word Bhdva is a technical term used in Yoga for denoting the 
functioning of consciousness on the spiritual planes where percep- 
tion is synthetic and all-inclusive and not of particular objects as 
on the lower planes. Bhavana is another technical term jwhich 
means ' dwelling in mind upon ' but used in conjunction with 
Atma-Bhava it will naturally mean living in and experiencing the 
transcendent knowledge and bliss of the Atmic plane. 

It may appear to the student that the renunciation of the 
attractions which bind the Yogi to the exalted condition of the 
Atmic plane should be a comparatively easy matter considering 
the wisdom he has acquired and the Vairagya he has developed. 
But, in judging of the effort required he should remember, 
that the consciousness of this plane represents the acme of power, 
bliss and knowledge which is utterly beyond human comprehen- 
sion and cannot be compared with anything with which we are 
familiar on the lower planes. Besides, the transcending of the Atmic 
plane which he has now to attempt really means the destruction 
of his very individuality since the Atma is the Very core of his 
separate existence in the realm of manifestation. It is true that a 
still higher and subtler kind of individuality emerges when the 
separate individual life of Atma is given up, but tremendous faith 
is needed for taking that final plunge into the void which now 
opens before him. And the basis of this faith is the realization 
that attachment to the transcendent consciousness of the Atmic 
plane is still attachment to something which is not the Supreme 
Reality, which is still in the domain of Citta and Vasana and, there- 
fore, subject to illusion, however subtle that illusion might be. 

The desire for this transcendent bliss and knowledge which is 
inherent in the consciousness of the Atmic plane destroys and 
eliminates the lower desires and brings the Yogi to the highest 
level of enlightenment which is possible within the realm of 
Prakrti, but even this knowledge and bliss when they are acquired 
become, in their turn, the means of bondage and must be given up 
before the final objective is achieved. This is a fundamental law 
of life — the lower must be given up before the next higher can 
be gained. 



428 SECTION IV (26) 

Tada hi viveka-nimnam kaivalya- 
pragbharam cittam. 

^T5T then f|[ verily fa=t«t>Pi*-»i inclined towards discrimination 
«S«(e^MM ! HKH heading or gravitating towards Kaivalya f^can the 
mind. 

26. Then, verily, the mind is inclined towards 
discrimination and gravitating towards Kaivalya. 

When the realization of the inadequacy of Atma-Bhdva dawns 
upon the Togi he determines to break this last fetter by renouncing 
the bliss and knowledge of the Atmic plane. Thenceforward all his 
efforts are directed towards the attainment of Kaivalya by the 
constant exercise of that intense and penetrating discrimination 
which alone can pierce through the last veil of Illusion. This and 
the next three Sutras throw some light on this last struggle of the 
soul to free itself completely from the bondage of matter before 
attaining Kaivalya. 

It should be noted that the word used in this Sutra for the 
agent which carries on this struggle is Citta. ' The Citta is gravitat- 
ing towards Kaivalya'. But how can Citta which is sought to be 
transcended in the process, struggle to attain liberation from itself? 
It would be like a person trying to lift himself up by his boot- 
straps. The resolution of this paradox lies in the fact that it is 
not the mind really which is struggling to free the consciousness 
from the limitations in which it has got involved . Hidden behind 
the mind is the Purusa, who all along in the entire cycle of evolu- 
tion is the real driving force behind the struggle to attain Self- 
realization. When the iron filings are attracted by a magnet it is 
the filings which appear to move but in reality it is the magnet 
which has induced magnetism in the filings and is the cause of 
the movement. 

The weapons used in this last stage of the struggle for Libera- 
tion are Viveka and Vairagya. The Togi has obtained a glimpse 



KAIVALYA PADA 



429 



of the Reality within him. He has to try and gain the awareness of 
Reality, again and again, through Viveka so that this awareness can 
be maintained without interruption (H-26) . And, at the same time, 
he has to intensify his Vairagya to such an extent that he passes 
into Dharma-Megha-Samddhi (IV-29). It is interesting to note that 
the weapons used in the last stage are the same as those used in the 
first stage. The Togi enters the path of Toga through Viveka and 
Vairagya and he also leaves this path through Viveka and Vairagya. 

Tac-chidresu pratyaya ntarani samskare- 
bhyah. 

dfrtoai in the breaks in it (discrimination) Mc^MUfiT other 
Pratyayas ^FPT^RT: from the force of impressions. 

27. In the intervals arise other Pratyayas from the 
force of Samskaras. 

This Sutra describes the swaying, to and fro, of consciousness, 
in the borderland which separates^ the Real from the unreal. The 
Togi is trying to maintain his foothold in the world of Reality but 
he is thrown back again and again into the realm of Illu'sion, 
though this Illusion is of the subtlest kind. He cannot maintain 
steadily that condition of consciousness which is indicated by 
Viveka Khyati and each relaxation in effort is followed instantly by 
the appearance of a Pratyaya which characterizes the functioning 
of consciousness through the medium of Citta. Pratyaya, as we 
have seen already, is a word used generally for the content of 
consciousness when it is functioning normally through a vehicle of 
any degree of subtlety. Emergence of a Pratyaya, therefore, means 
that the consciousness has temporarily receded from the Reality 
realized in Nirbija Samadhi and is functioning at one or another 
level of Citta. It may be worthwhile pointing out here again that 
the word Pratyaya like Citta or Vd sand is of universal import and is 
co-extensive with them. Wherever consciousness is functioning 
normally through any level of Citta in a vehicle there must be a 



430 



SECTION IV (27, 28) 



content of consciousness which is called Pratyaya in Yogic termino- 
logy. It is only in AsamprajMta Samddhi that there is no Pratyaya 
but this is so because consciousness is passing through a critical 
phase and is really hovering between two vehicles. Even on the 
highest level of Citta corresponding to the Atmic plane there is a 
Pratyaya although it is impossible for us to visualize what it is like. 
When consciousness is thrown back into the Atmic or any other 
lower vehicle owing to the relaxation of Viveka, Pratyaya of the 
corresponding plane emerges at once into the field of consciousness. 
Why is the Yogi's consciousness thrown back into the vehicles 
which he has transcended and why do these Pratyayas appear, again 
and again, in this stage of his progress towards Self-realization? 
Because the Samskaras which he has brought over from his past are 
still present in his vehicles in a dormant condition and emerge 
into his consciousness as soon as there is relaxation of effort or a 
temporary interruption of Viveka Khyati. As long as these 
' seeds ' are present merely in a dormant, condition and have not 
been ' burnt ' or rendered quite harmless by Dkarma-M;gha-Samddhi 
they must sprout into his consciousness as soon as a suitable 
opportunity presents itself. 



Hanam esam klesavad uktam. 

£MH removal I^IH of these «HH¥Md like that of the Klefas 
or afflictions 3WT has been declared or described. 

28. Their removal like that of Klesas, as has been 
described. 

The problem before the Yogi therefore is: How to prevent 
the emergence of these Pratyayas which have their source in the 
Samskaras brought over from the past? The activation of the 
Samskaras is to be prevented by the method which has been pres- 
cribed for the removal of Kleias in Section II (10, 11 and 26). 
The reason for this should be obvious to the student if he has 



KAIVALVA PADA 



431 



understood the nature of Klesas, their relation to Rarmas and the 
method of their removal as outlined in Section II. The Karmas 
or Samskaras which are rooted in Klesas cannot become active if 
the Klesas are quiescent. The Klesas must remain quiesGent in the 
absence of Avidyd from which they are all derived (H-4) . Avidyd 
cannot manifest as long as the Yogi is able to keep undimmed his 
discriminative faculty and to maintain that awareness of Reality 
which is known as Viveka Khyati (11-26). It follows logically, 
therefore, that the only way to prevent the dormant Samskaras 
from becoming active is to maintain undimmed Viveka Khyati as 
indicated in 11-26. The moment this is interrupted the door 
opens for the emergence of Pratyayas which are sought to be 
excluded completely at this stage. The chief effort of the Yogi in 
this last stage of his struggle to attain Kaivalya is thus to acquire 
the capacity to maintain undimmed and unbroken this high and 
penetrating state of discrimination which keeps the force of Avidya 
in abeyance. Upon his capacity to maintain this condition in- 
definitely depends the possibility of his entering Dharma-Megha- 
Samddhi which burns the seeds of Samskaras and makes their 
re-activation impossible. 






SP^T 



Prasamkhyane 'py akusidasya sarvatha 
viveka-khyater dharma-meghah 
samadhih. 
mife^H in the knowledge of the highest meditation 3TpT even 
3<jj*n<i^ ' of one who has no interest left ?pf*TT in every way; by all 
means fMN>WRT: discrimination leading to awareness of Reality 
tTHilfcl : showering the Dharmas; relating to properties SPTTfsr: trance. 

29. In the case of one, who is able to maintain a 
constant state of Vairagya even towards the most exalted 
state of enlightenment and to exercise the highest kind 
of discrimination, follows Dharma-Megha-Samadhi. 



432 



SECTION IV (29) 



By the uninterrupted practice of Viveka Khyati the Togi keeps 
Avidya at bay and prevents the emergence of Pratyayas in his 
exalted consciousness. To this is added the practice of that 
highest kind of mental renunciation which is known as Para- 
Vairagya. In spite of the overpowering attraction of the high 
state of illumination and bliss which he has attained he renounces 
completely his attachment to -it and maintains uninterruptedly 
this attitude of supreme non-attachment towards it. In fact, 
Para-Vairagya which he is now practising is nothing new but is 
merely the culmination of the renunciation which he has been 
practising since his entry into the path of Toga. Just as Viveka 
Khyati has its beginnings in very simple forms of Viveka and 
is developed by prolonged and intensive practice during his 
progress, in the same way Para-Vairagya develops from simple acts 
of renunciation and reaches its culmination in the renunciation of 
the bliss and illumination of the Atmic plane. It should also be 
borne in mind that Viveka and Vairagya are very closely related to 
each other and are really like two sides of the same coin. Viveka, 
by opening the eyes of the soul, brings about non-attachment to 
the objects which keep it in bondage and the non-attachment 
thus developed, in its turn, further clarifies the vision of the soul 
and enables it to see more deeply into the illusion of life. Viveka 
and Vairagya thus strengthen and reinforce each other and form 
a kind of ' virtuous circle ' which accelerates in an ever-increasing 
degree the progress of the Togi towards Self-realization. 

The combined practice of Viveka Khyati and Para-Vairagya 
when continued for a long time reaches, by a process of mutual 
reinforcement, a tremendous degree of intensity and culminates 
ultimately in Dharma-Megha-Samddhi, the highest kind of Samddhi 
which burns up the ' seeds ' of Samskaras and unlocks the gates of 
the World of Reality in which the Purusa lives eternally. Why this 
Samddhi is called Dharma-Megha-Samddhi is not generally understood 
and the statements usually made are forced explanations which do 
not make sense. In most of these explanations the word Dharma 
is interpreted as virtue or merit and Dharma-Megha is taken to 
mean ' a cloud which showers virtues or merit ' which, of course, 
explains nothing. The significance of the phrase Dharma-Megha 
will become clear if we assign to the word Dharma the meaning 



KAIVALYA PADA 



433 



which it has in IV-12, namely that of property, characteristic or 
function. Megha, of course, is a technical term used in Tpgic 
literature for the cloudy or misty condition through which con- 
sciousness passes in the critical state of Asamprajnata Sdmadhi when 
there is nothing in the field of consciousness. 

Now, Nirbija Samddhi which is practised in this last stage 
which we are considering is a kind of Asamprajnata Samddhi in 
which the consciousness of the Togi is trying to free itself from the 
last veil of illusion to emerge into the Light of Reality itself. When 
this effort succeeds the consciousness of the Togi leaves the world 
of manifestation in which Gunas and their peculiar combinations, 
namely, Dharmas, operate and emerges into the world of Reality in 
which they no longer exist. His condition may be compared to 
the condition of a pilot in an aeroplane who comes out of a cloud 
bank into bright sunlight and begins to see everything clearly. 
Dharma-Megha-Samddhi, therefore, means the final Samddhi in which 
the Togi shakes himself free from the world of Dharmas which 
obscure Reality like a cloud. 

The passage through. Dharma-Megha-Samddhi completes the 
evolutionary cycle of the individual and by destroying Avidya, com- 
pletely and for ever, brings about the end ofSamyoga of Purusa and 
Prakrti referred to in 11-23. No more can Avidya again obscure 
the vision of the Purusa who has attained full Self-realization. 
This process is irreversible and after reaching this stage it is not 
possible for the Purusa to fall again into the realm of Maya from 
which he has obtained Liberation. Before this final goal was 
reached it was possible for the Togi to fall even from a very high 
stage of enlightenment, but" not after he has passed through 
Dharma-Megha-Samddhi and attained the Enlightenment of Kaivalya. 

The next five Sutras merely describe the results of passing 
through Dharma-Megha-Samddhi and attaining Kaivalya. It should 
be noted here that no effort is made to describe the experience of 
Reality. That would be futile for no one can imagine the tran- 
scendent glory of that consciousness into which the Togi passes 
on attaining Kaivalya. Mystics have sometimes tried to convey in 
rapturous language the glorious visions of the higher planes which 
they have reached in Samddhi. These descriptions, though very 
inspiring, yet fail utterly to give to those who are still blind any 



434 



SECTION IV (29, 30) 



idea of the beauty and grandeur of those planes. How can, then, 
anyone convey through the crude medium of language even a 
hint regarding that Supreme experience which the Yogi gains on 
attaining Kaivalya and Patanjali, knowing the futility of such a 
task, has not even attempted it. But he has given in a few Sutras 
some of the results which accrue from the attainment of Kaivalya. 

Tatah klesa-karma-nivrttih. 

cRT: thence <M4i: afflictions 3HT action and its reactions 
fHwfw:. cessation: freedom from. 

30. Then follows freedom from Kief as and Karmas. 

The first result of attaining Kaivalya is that the Togi cannot 
thenceforward be bound by Kleias and Karmas. The attainment 
of Kaivalya follows the destruction of Kleias and Karmas. What 
the Sutra, therefore, means is that the very potentiality for the re- 
emergence of these two instruments of bondage is destroyed. The 
Jivanmukta cannot, after passing through Dharma-Megha-Samadhi 
and attaining Kaivalya, again fall into Avidya arid start generating 
Karmas which bind. 

The relation of Kleias and Karmas should always be borne in 
mind by the student, for on this is based the technique of attaining 
freedom from the binding action of Karma. Kleias and Karmas are 
related to each other as cause and effect, as has been thoroughly 
explained under 11-12 and no Karma can bind where there is no 
Avidya but awareness of Reality. All action in this state is neces- 
sarily done in complete identification with the Divine Conscious- 
ness without the slightest identification with the individual ego. 
That is why no result accrues to the individual. The illusion of a 
separate life has been destroyed and no separate individual, in the 
ordinary sense, really exists under these conditions. It is true that 
according to the Togic philosophy each Purusa is a separate in- 
dividual but the separate individuality of each Purusa means 



KAIVALYA PADA 



435 



merely that He is a separate centre of consciousness in the Supreme 
Reality and not that his consciousness is separated from that of 
other Purusas and pursues its separate individual ends as in the 
case of ordinary individuals blinded by illusion of a separate life. 
Separate individuality is perfectly compatible with the closest 
unification of consciousness, as every mystic or occultist who has 
experience of the higher spiritual consciousness definitely knows. 
In Kaivalya this paradoxical simultaneity of Individuality and 
Oneness reaches its utmost perfection. 

Tada sarvavarana-malapetasya jnana- 
syanantyaj jfieyam alpam. 

?TCT then 3R" all 3H<K U I that which covers up, veils or 
distorts *FT impurities ar^TCT devoid of; from which is removed 
sTRTT of knowledge 3rR^TTq; because of the infinity of 5FU{ the 
knowable aj^rq- but little. 

31. Then, in consequence of the removal of all 
obscuration and impurities, that which can be known 
(through the mind) is but little in comparison with the 
infinity of knowledge (obtained in Enlightenment). 

The second consequence of attaining Kaivalya is the sudden 
expansion of consciousness into the realm of infinite knowledge. 
When the last veil of illusion is removed in Dharma-Megha-Samadhi 
the Enlightenment which comes is of an entirely new kind. In 
the different stages of Sabija Samddhi the knowledge which comes 
at each successive expansion of consciousness into a higher realm 
ofCitta appears tremendously greater than in the preceding stage. 
But even the transcendent knowledge of the Atmic plane which 
represents the highest reach of the mind in the realm of mani- 
festation sinks into insignificance when compared with Viveka- 
jam-Jninam (111-55) which comes in the state of Enlightenment 

28 



436 



SECTION IV (31) 



of Kaivalya. A million and a billion are increasingly tremendous 
magnitudes as compared with one, but they all sink into insignifi- 
cance when, compared with infinity as the following mathematical 
equations will show 



— = 
«< 



1,000,000 1,000,000,000 
— = ■ 1— = 



When we are in the realm of Infinity we are not in the realm of 
magnitudes at all. So the Jivanmukta is not really in the realm of 
knowledge but has transcended knowledge and passed into the 
realm of pure consciousness. Knowledge is produced by the 
imposition of mental limitations on pure consciousness, and so 
even the highest kind of knowledge cannot be compared with the 
Enlightenment which comes when all these limitations are removed 
and the Yogi passes into the realm of pure consciousness. The 
relation of knowledge and Enlightenment is analogous to the 
relation of Time and Eternity Eternity is not time of infinite 
extent but a state which transcends Time altogether The two 
states do not belong to the same category. 

It may be pointed out here that all the real mysteries of Life 
which we try to unravel by the help of the intellect are really 
rooted in the Eternal and are expressions in terms of Time and 
Space of realities which exist in their true form (Svarupd) in the 
Eternal. That is why it is not possible to solve any real problem 
of Life as long as our consciousness is confined within the realm of 
the unreal, and much less so, while it is still confined within the 
narrow and cramping limitations of the intellect. The so-called 
intellectual solutions of our problems which academic philosophy 
seeks to provide are no solutions at all but merely statements of 
the same problems in different terms which really push back the 
problems to a deeper level. The only effective way to solve all 
these problems is to dive into our own consciousness by the help 
of the technique outlined in the Togic philosophy and to free our 
consciousness from all limitations which obscure its Self-illumina- 
tion. In the Light of the Eternal alone can all problems of Life 
be solved, because as said above, they are all rooted in the Eternal. 
To be more exact, the problems are not solved in the Light of the 



KAIVALYA PADA 



437 



Eternal consciousness, solution being a process characteristic of 
the illusion-bound intellect. They are resolved. They are no 
longer there, for they were shadows cast by the intellect in the 
realm of the unreal and naturally cannot exist in the. domain of 
the Real. 

It also follows from what has been said above that the Mystery 
of Life cannot be unravelled piecemeal. We cannot break up 
this Great Mystery into a number of component problems and 
then proceed to solve these problems, one by one, although this is 
what modern philosophy attempts to do. The resolution of the 
Mystery depends upon obtaining the synthetic vision of the 
Eternal and not upon putting together the separate and partial 
solutions obtained by the analytical processes of the intellect. It 
is a question of All or none '. 

That is why the Togi does not make any serious effort to 
solve the so-called problems of Life by the intellectual pro- 
cesses, knowing as he does that the best solution which he can get 
in this manner is not a real solution. Not that he despises the 
intellect, but he knows its inherent limitations and uses it only to 
transcend those limitations. He holds his soul in patience and 
bends all his energies in attaining the goal pointed out by the 
Togic philosophy. This philosophy does not hold out any promise 
of solving the problems of Life but provides the key which 
unlocks the World of Reality in which all these problems are 
resolved and seen in their true nature and perspective. 

3^. <tct: fdi^Tni Mr<<jim^^irkH<jiHH i 



Tatah krtarthanam parinama-krama- 
samaptir gunanam. 

cT?T: by that; therefore £dmTHi having fulfilled their object 
qftWPT of the changes ^PR" process timfkt: the end ^"IMIH of the 
Gunas or the three fundamental qualities. 

32. The three Gunas having fulfilled their object, 
the process of change (in the Gunas) comes to an end. 



438 



SECTION IV (32) 



In order to understand this Sutra it is necessary to recall the 
theory of Klesas discussed in Section II, especially 11-23-24 
which indicate the purpose and the means of bringing together 
Purusa and Prakrti. That purpose having been fulfilled through 
the destruction of Avidya and the attainment of Kaivalya, the 
compulsory association . of Purusa and Prakrti dissolves naturally 
and automatically and with this dissolution conies to an end the 
transformations of the Gunas. 

According to the Togic philosophy the quiescent condition of 
Prakrti which is known as Samyavastha is disturbed and the incessant 
transformations of the three Gunas begin when Purusa and Prakrti 
are brought together. These transformations continue as long as 
the association lasts and must come to an end when the associa- 
tion is dissolved, much in the same manner as the electric current 
stops when the magnetic field is removed in a dynamo. The 
subsidence of the disturbance in Prakrti and the reversion of the 
Gunas to the harmonized condition follows as a natural result of 
the dissociation of Purusa and Prakrti. 

What does this reversion of Prakrti to the Samyavastha 
mean? Does it mean that Purusa and Prakrti have reverted to 
their original state and the valuable fruits of the long evolutionary 
process are lost? No! The Purusa retains his Self-realization and 
Prakrti retains the capacity to respond, instantaneously to his con- 
sciousness and to serve as an instrument of his will through the 
efficient and sensitive vehicles which have been built up during 
the process of evolutionary development. But henceforth, the 
Purusa is not bound by the vehicles as he was before the attainment 
of Kaivalya. The vehicles on the different planes of manifestation 
may be retained or allowed to dissolve but they always remain in 
their potential form, to spring forth into activity whenever the 
Purusa wants to use them. He uses them as mere vehicles for his 
consciousness without any self-identification and, therefore, without 
gathering any new Karmas or Samskaras, and he is free to dissociate 
himself from them and retire into his Real form whenever he so 
wills. The association between Purusa and Prakrti is now a com- 
pletely free and. perfect association involving no bondage or com- 
pulsion for the Purusa. He has destroyed Avidya and there are no 
Saniskaras to keep him bound to the world of manifestation as in 



KAIVALYA PADA 



439 



the case of the ordinary Jivatmd. The equilibrium of the Gunas 
now evolved is so stable that they revert to it instantaneously and 
automatically the moment Purusa withdraws his consciousness into 
himself. Not only is it perfectly stable but it contains within it 
the potentiality of assuming instantaneously any combination that 
may be required for the expression oi consciousness. The student 
should also read in this connection what has been said in dealing 
with 11-18. 

Ksana-pratiyogi parinamaparanta- 
nirgrahyah kramah. 

STT moments srf^pft'fl' corresponding TfTTPT change sprTT^T 
(at) the final end PmT^J : entirely apprehensible ^*T process; 
succession. 



33. The process, corresponding to moments which 
become apprehensible at the final end of transforma- 
tion (of the Gunas), is Kramah. 

This is one of the most important and interesting Sutras in 
this Section because it throws some light on the nature of the 
manifested world and Time. In this Sutra we have a remarkable 
illustration of the condensation in a few words cf a whole theory 
of a scientific nature which would be dealt with in a volume by a 
modern writer. 

Before we discuss the profound implications of this Sutra it is 
necessary to explain the significance of some of the words which 
compose it. For these words stand for definite philosophical con- 
cepts and without a knowledge of their connotations it is not 
possible to appreciate the significance of the Sutra. It is only with 
the help of such words which stand for a whole set of ideas and are 
pregnant with profound meanings that a Sutra can be constructed. 

Let us take the word Ksana. Literally it means a moment, 
but behind this simple meaning there is hidden a whole philosophy 



440 



SECTION IV (33) 



of Time which throws much light on our modern conception of 
Time. According to this philosophy, Time, contrary to our 
impression and belief, is not a continuous thing but discontinuous. 
Before the advent of modern Science matter was generally consi- 
dered to be continuous, but investigations in the field of Chemistry 
showed that it was not continuous but discontinuous, being com- 
posed of discrete particles separated from one another by enormous 
empty spaces. In the same way investigations by Togic methods 
showed that the apparently continuous series of changes which 
are taking place in the phenomenal world and by which we" 
measure time, are not really continuous. The changes consist of 
a number of successive states which are quite distinct and separate 
from one another. 

The mechanism for projecting a cinematographic picture on 
a screen provides an almost perfect illustration of this actual 
discontinuity hidden beneath apparent continuity. The following 
diagram will give some idea of the apparatus which is employed 
in projecting such a picture. 




Fig. 15 

AB is the screen. D is the source of light. O is an aperture 
which allows light from D to fall on the screen. This aperture 
opens and closes alternately and its movement is synchronized 
with the movement of the film. As the aperture opens, one of 
the series of pictures in the film comes opposite to it and a beam 



KAIVALYA PADA 



441 



of light shooting through the picture projects it on the screen. 
The aperture then closes, the film moves, the next picture comes 
into place and is projected on the screen as before. 

It will be seen, therefore, that the apparently continuous 
picture produced on the screen is really a series of separate images 
thrown on the screen in quick succession. The time interval 
between the successive images is less than one-tenth of a second 
and that is why we get the impression of a continuous picture. 

According to Togic philosophy the seemingly continuous 
phenomena which we cognize through the instrumentality of the 
mind are not really continuous and like the cinematographic 
picture on the screen consist of a series, of discontinuous states. 
Each successive change in the phenomenal world which is separate 
and distinct produces a corresponding impression upon the mind 
but these impressions succeed one another with such rapidity that 
we get the impression of continuity. The interval of time Corres- 
ponding to each of these successive states is called a Ksana. So 
Ksana may be called the smallest unit of time which cannot be 
broken up further. 

The next word to be considered is Kramah. We have seen 
just now that the impression of continuous, phenomena in our 
mind is produced by a succession of discontinuous changes in 
Prakrti around us. Kramalf. stands for this process -consisting of a 
relentless succession of discontinuous changes underlying all kinds 
of phenomena. This process is ultimately based upon the unit of 
time, Ksana, as the projection of the cinematographic picture is 
based upon each opening and closing of aperture. As Ksana 
succeeds Ksana the whole manifested world passes from one distinct 
state to another distinct state, but the succession is so rapid that 
we are not conscious of the discontinuity. 

It will be seen, therefore, that according to the Togic philosophy 
not only is the whole basis of manifestation material' — using the 
word material in its widest sense — but also that the changes which 
take place in Prakrti and which produce all kinds of phenomena 
are essentially mechanical, that is, based on a hidden, essentially 
mechanical process. The whole manifested Universe and every- 
thing in it changes from moment to moment by a relentless law 
which is inherent, in the very nature of manifestation. 



442 



SECTION IV (33) 



If we have grasped the nature of the process indicated by the 
two words Ksana and Kramah it should not be difficult to under- 
stand the meaning of the Sutra under discussion. It means simply 
that the Yogi can become aware of the Ultimate Reality only 
when his consciousness is liberated from the limitations of. this 
process which produces Time, by performing Samyatna on this pro- 
cess as indicated in 111-53. As long as his consciousness is involved 
in the process he cannot know his Real nature. It is only when 
he steps out of the world of the unreal into the Light of Reality 
tha'c he realizes not only the true nature of Reality but also of 
the Relative world of Time and Space which he has left behind. 

The thoughtful student may find in the profound idea adum- 
brated in this Sutra the clue to the nature of Time and Energy 
and the Qaantum Theory which has proved so helpful in the 
development of modern Science. It is not possible to go into 
these profound and fundamental problems here but the following 
two ideas should prove suggestive to the student who is interested 
in these subjects. 

If the fundamental process underlying- the phenomenal world 
is discontinuous then all apparently continuous processes which 
we can observe and measure must also be discontinuous. Take 
for example, the radiant energy which comes to us from the Sun. 
Does this energy flow to us continuously or does it come in discrete 
portions or quanta? If all the changes in the Solar system are 
discontinuous and the Solar system, as it were, comes into being 
and then disappears alternately from moment to moment, then the 
flow of energy from the Sun must be a discontinuous process. 
This conclusion which follows from the doctrines of the Togic 
philosophy is in general accord with the basic idea underlying the 
Quantum Theory. 

The two Sutras 111-53 and IV-33 also throw some light on 
the nature of Time. As the perception of phenomena is the 
result of the impressions produced in consciousness by a succession 
of mental images it is the number of mental images which will 
really determine the duration of the phenomenon which we call 
Time. There cannot thus be an absolute measure of Time. Time 
must be related to the number of images which pass through the 
mind. This idea will throw some light on the different measures 



KAIVALYA PADA 



443 



of Time which are known to exist on the different planes of the 
Universe. 



Purusartha-sunyanam gunanam prati- 
prasavah kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha 
va citi-sakter iti. 

J^TT* aim of the Purusa MHf devoid of ^u|MI of the Gunas 
or the three fundamental qualities y(di)*H: re-absorption; reces- 
sion; re-mergence +c|c^ Liberation *<1^M (i n ) Real or own nature 
srf^ST establishment «TT or f^(d«l«*d: of the power of pure Con- 
sciousness ^fcT Finis. 

34. Kaivalya is the state (of Enlightenment) follow- 
ing re-mergence of the Gunas because of their becoming 
devoid of the object of the Purusa. In this state the 
Purusa is established in his Real nature which is pure 
Consciousness. Finis. 

We now come to the last Sutra which defines and sums up the 
ultimate state of Enlightenment which is called Kaivalya. The 
meaning of the Sutra may be expressed simply in the following 
words : ' Kaivalya is that state of Self-realization in which the 
Purusa gets established finally when the purpose of his long evolu- 
tionary unfoldment has been attained. In this state the Gunas, 
having fulfilled their purpose, recede to a condition of equilibrium 
and therefore the power of pure Consciousness can function with- 
out any obscuration or limitation.' 

It should be noted that this is not a description of the content 
of Consciousness in the state of Kaivalya. As has been pointed 
out before, no one living in the world of the unreal can under- 
stand or describe the Reality of which the Togi becomes aware on 



444 



SECTION IV (34) 



}> 



KAIVALYA PADA 



445 



attaining Kaivalya. This Sutra merely points out in a general 
way certain conditions which are present in Kaivalya and which 
serve to distinguish it from the exalted conditions of consciousness 
which precede it. 

It is natural that vagueness should exist and a large number 
of misconceptions be prevalent about a state of consciousness and 
a goal of human achievement which is so utterly beyond human 
comprehension. But some of these misconceptions are so obvious 
that it would be worthwhile pointing them out before bringing 
this chapter to a close. 

Does Kaivalya mean complete annihilation of the individuality 
and the merging of the Yogi's consciousness in the Divine Con- 
sciousness as implied by the well-known sentence ' the dewdrop 
slips into the Shining Sea ' ? In considering this important question 
which has been partly dealt with in 11-18 we have to bear in 
mind that Kaivalya is the culmination of a tremendously long 
evolutionary process extending over innumerable lives and involving 
enormous periods of time. In the last phase of this evolutionary 
development which is brought about by the practice of Toga, 
power, knowledge and bliss unfold from within the Yogi's con- 
sciousness by leaps and bounds and become so great towards the 
end that the human mind simply reels from its mere contemplation. 
At each stage of his progress the Yogi finds that the new conscious- 
ness which dawns within him is infinitely more vital and glorious 
than the preceding one and he seems to be progressively uncover- 
ing a tremendous Reality which is hidden within the deepest 
recesses of his own being. Kaivalya is attained by transcend- 
ing the most transcendent state of consciousness which it is possible 
to attain within the realm of Prakrii. Does it stand to reason 
that in the new consciousness which is attained his individuality 
is completely lost and the valuable fruits of evolution gathered at 
the cost of so much suffering and travail are washed away- in 
one stroke? 

It is reasonable to suppose that the experience of unity with 
the Divine Consciousness is so perfect and overwhelming that the 
Yogi seems to lose his own individuality for the time being but this 
does not necessarily mean that the individuality is dissolved and 
lost for ever in that glorious Reality. If the individuality is 



-S> 



completely dissolved how do we then account for its reappearance 
in the lower worlds? For, it is an undoubted fact that these great 
Beings do return to the lower worlds after gaining Enlightenment. 
It is easy for the dewdrop to slip and be lost in the Shining Sea 
but it cannot be recovered from that Sea again. In the same 
way, if the individuality is merged and lost completely it cannot 
separate and manifest again. If it can. do so, it simply means 
that a germ of individuality, however subtle it may be, still remains 
even in the perfect union of the Jivatmd with Paramdtmd. So let 
us not make the mistake of supposing that the long and tedious 
evolutionary development of a human being ends merely in his 
disappearance into a Reality from which there is no return and 
the hard earned fruits of evolution are lost both for him and 
others. Let us trust that the Almighty who has -created this 
wonderful Universe and devised the Evolutionary Scheme has 
more intelligence than ourselves ! 

Then again, from the literal meaning of Kaivalya- many people 
are led to imagine that it is a state of consciousness in which the 
Purusa is completely isolated from all others and lives alone in 
solitary grandeur like a man sitting on the peak of a mountain. 
Such a state, if it did exist, would be a horror and not the con- 
summation of bliss. The idea of isolation implied in Kaivalya is 
to be interpreted in relation to Prakrii from which the Purusa is 
isolated. This isolation frees him from all the limitations which 
are inherent in being involved in matter in a state of Avidya but 
leads him, on the other hand, to the closest possible unification 
with Consciousness in all its manifestations. Complete isolation 
from Prakrti means complete unification with Consciousness or 
Reality, because it is matter which divides the different units of 
consciousness, and in the world of Reality wc are all one. The 
more we transcend matter and isolate our consciousness from it 
the greater becomes the degree of our union with Paramesvara 
and all the Jivalmas who are centres in His Consciousness. And 
as Ananda is inseparable from Love or the awareness of oneness 
we can see easily why this consciousness of Kaivalya which includes 
everyone in its vast embrace leads to the acme of Bliss. 

The last question that might be dealt with in connection with 
V-34 is whether Kaivalya represents the end of the journey. 



446 



SECTION IV (34) 



V'» 



Although a study of the Yoga-Sutras might give the impression that 
Kaivalya is the final goal, those who have trodden the Path and 
passed further along it, as well as Occult tradition, declare with 
one voice that Kaivalya is only a stage in the unending unfoldment 
of consciousness. When the Purusa attains this stage of Self- 
realization he sees opening before him new vistas of achievement 
which are utterly beyond human imagination. As Lord Buddha 
said ' Veil upon veil shall lift, but still veil upon veil will be found 
behind.' The Yoga-Sutras give the technique for achieving the final 
goal as far as human beings are concerned. What lies beyond is not 
only not our concern for the time being, but is totally beyond our 
comprehension and therefore cannot be the subject of study. The 
further mysteries which we have to unravel and the stages of the 
Path we have to tread are hidden within the still deeper recesses 
of our consciousness and will reveal themselves in due course when 
we are ready for them. Enough for us, for the .time being, is the 
goal of achievement which is implied in Kaivalya. 



i 



INDEX 



Abhinivesa, 130, 150 
Abhyasa, 20, 21,22 
Ahimsa, 206, 237 
Alinga, 114, 179 
Ananta, 254 
Antarayah, 70, 73, 84 
Aparigraha, 206, 243 
Apavarga, 171 
Asana, 205, 252 
Asmita, 130, 142, 387 
Asteya, 206, 240 
Atma, 269 
Atmabhava, 426 

Avidya, 130, 138, 140, 1%, 198, 200, 
402 



B 



Bhoga, 171 
Bhutas, 171, 269 
Brahmacarya, 206, 241 
Buddhi, 269, 418, 420 



Cetana, pratyak, 7 1 

Gitta, 7, 85, 269, 275, 410, 412, 413, 

414, 416, 417, 418, 423, 424, 428 
Citta, means, for making steady, 85, 

87,88,89,90,91,93 
Citta, nirmana, 387, 389, 390 

D 

Dharana, 205, 267, 275, 291 
Dharma, 403, 408 
DharmI, 303 
Dhyana, 205, 278, 291 
Drasta, 10, 11, 169, 185, 198,423 
Drsyam, 169, 171, 188,423 
Duhkha, 82, 148, 161, 168 
Dvamdva, 256 
Dvesa, 130, 148 

G 

Gunas, 171, 179, 408, 409, 437, 443 

I 
Indriyas, 171,269,271 



IsVara, 56, 59, 61 

Isvara-pranidhana, 54, 127, 220, 250 
Isvara, vacaka of, 62 



Kaivalva, 1S8, 365, 372, 428, 443 

Karmas, 160. 391 

Karmasava, 157, 390 

Klesas, 157, 159,430.434 

KleSas, attenuation of, 129 

Klesas, nature of, 130 

Klesas, philosophy of (synopsis), 137 

Klesas, reduction of, 152 

Klesas, suppression of, 155 

Krama, 305, 368, 437, 439 

Ksana, 368, 439 



Linga, stage of gunas, 179 
M 

Maha-vratam, 218 
Mantra, 377 

N 

Nidra, 13, 18,91 
Nirodha, 6, 122 
Nirodha Parinama, 292 
Niyama, 205,220 



Parinama, 305, 307, 383, 437, 439 

Parinama, dharma-laksana, 300 

Parinama, ekagrata, 298 

Parinama, nirodha, 292, 296 

Parinama, samadhi, 297 

Prajna, 34, 117, 119,287 

Prakrti, 188, 189, 191, 383 

Prakrtiiaya, 44 

Pramana, 13, 16 

Pranava, 62 

Pranava, japa of, €8, 70 

Pranayama, 87, 205, 258, 264, 265, 

266, 267 
Pratvahara, 205, 268, 271 
Puriisa, 56, 185, 188, 191, 337, 372, 

414,424,434 



448 



THE SCIENCE OF YOGA 



\ 



R 



Raga, 130, 147 



Samadhi, 205, 250, 280, 291, 377 

Samadhi, aspects of, 32 

Samadhi, asamprajfiata, 41 

Samadhi, dharma-megha, 43 1 

Samadhi, nirblja, 122, 292 

Samadhi, nirvicara, 112, 115, 117, 119 

Samadhi, nirvitarka, 109 

Samadhi, sabtja, 114, 121 

Samadhi, samprajnata, 31 

Samadhi, sa.vica.ra, 112 

Samadhi, savitarka, 101 

Samskara, 316, 396 

Samtosa, 220, 247 

Samyama, 286, 287 

Sat'tva, 336, 363, 372 

Satya, 206, 239 

Sauca, 220, 245, 246 

Siddhas, 333 

Siddhis, 307, 343, 377 

Siddhi, kaivalya, 365 

Siddhi, knowledge of past and future, 

307 
Siddhi, knowledge of sounds uttered, 

314 
Siddhi, knowledge of previous birth, 

316 
Siddhi, knowledge of another's mind, 

317 
Siddhi, knowledge of time of death, 

320 
Siddhi, knowledge of the small, the 

hidden and the distant, 324 
Siddhi, knowledge of the solar system, 

326 
Siddhi, knowledge of the arrangement 

of stars, 328 
Siddhi, knowledge of the movements 

of stars, 329 
Siddhi, knowledge of the organization 

of the body, 330 
Siddhi, knowledge of Purusa, 337 
Siddhi, mastery of indriyas, 359 
Siddhi, mastery of- omnipotence and 

omniscience, 363 
Siddhi, mastery of paflca-bhutas. 351, 

357 
Siddhi, mastery of Pradhana, 361 
Siddhi, power of disappearance, 318, 

319 
Siddhi, power of entering another's 

body, 343 



Siddhi, power of immovability, 332 

Siddhi, power of increasing gastric 
fire, 346 

Siddhi, power of increasing strength, 
323 

Siddhi, power of inhibiting hunger and 
thirst, 331 

Siddhi, power of intuition (pratibha), 
334, 341 

Siddhi, power of knowing the nature 
of mind, 335 

Siddhi, power of levitation, 345 

Siddhi, power of Maha-Videha, 349 

Siddhi, power of passage through 
space, 348 

Siddhi, power of seeing Perfected 
Beings, 333 

Siddhi, power of strengthening quali- 
ties, 322 

Siddhi, power of superphysical hear- 
ing, 347 

Smrti, 13, 19, 109, 396, 418 

Suk'ha, 85, 147, 247 

Sutra, method of exposition, 3 

Svadhyaya, 127, 220, 250 



Tanmatras, 269 

Tapas, 127, 220, 248, 377 



V 



Vairagya, 20, 25, 30 

Vasana, 394, 400, 402, 424 

Videha, 44 

Vikalpa, 13, 17 

Viksepa, 73 

Viksepa, elimination of, 85, 87, 88, 89, 

90, 91, 93 
Viksepa, symptoms of, 82 
Viparyaya, 13, 17' 
Vitarka, 230, 232 
Vivekajam jnanam. 368, 369, 370 
Viveka-khyatih, 200, 202, 431 
Vrtti, 8. 12 



Yama, 205, 206 
Yoga, definition of, 6 
Yoga, kriya, 127 
Yogi, bhava-pratyaya, 44 
Yogi, his mastery, 94 
Yogi, upaya-'pratyaya, 47 



For Information on 

Theosophy and the Theosophieal Society 

please read on: 



